<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Dawn of Day</title>
      <author><name reg="Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm">Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp> <name>John McFarland Kennedy</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>June 9, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">39955</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-06-09">June 9, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Dianna Adair, Joe C, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made
            available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Friedrich Nietzsche</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Dawn of Day</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Translated by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">John McFarland Kennedy</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Author of <q>The Quintessence of Nietzsche</q>, <q>Religions and Philosophers of the East</q></p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">There are many dawns which have yet to shed their light.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rig-Veda</hi>.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The MacMillan Company</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1911</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction.</head>

<p>
When Nietzsche called his book <hi rend='italic'>The Dawn of Day</hi>,
he was far from giving it a merely fanciful title to
attract the attention of that large section of the
public which judges books by their titles rather than
by their contents. <hi rend='italic'>The Dawn of Day</hi> represents,
figuratively, the dawn of Nietzsche's own philosophy.
Hitherto he had been considerably influenced
in his outlook, if not in his actual thoughts,
by Schopenhauer, Wagner, and perhaps also Comte.
<hi rend='italic'>Human, all-too-Human</hi>, belongs to a period of transition.
After his rupture with Bayreuth, Nietzsche
is, in both parts of that work, trying to stand on his
own legs, and to regain his spiritual freedom; he is
feeling his way to his own philosophy. <hi rend='italic'>The Dawn
of Day</hi>, written in 1881 under the invigorating influence
of a Genoese spring, is the dawn of this new
Nietzsche. <q>With this book I open my campaign
against morality,</q> he himself said later in his autobiography,
the <hi rend='italic'>Ecce Homo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Just as in the case of the books written in his
prime&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Joyful Wisdom</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zarathustra</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Beyond
Good and Evil</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Genealogy of Morals</hi>&mdash;we
cannot fail to be impressed in this work by
Nietzsche's deep psychological insight, the insight
that showed him to be a powerful judge of men and
things unequalled in the nineteenth or, perhaps, any
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
other century. One example of this is seen in his
searching analysis of the Apostle Paul (Aphorism
<ref target='Sect_68'>68</ref>), in which the soul of the <q>First Christian</q>
is ruthlessly and realistically laid bare to us.
Nietzsche's summing-up of the Founder of Christianity&mdash;for
of course, as is now generally recognised,
it was Paul, and not Christ, who founded the Christian
Church&mdash;has not yet called forth those bitter
attacks from theologians that might have been expected,
though one reason for this apparent neglect
is no doubt that the portrait is so true, and in these
circumstances silence is certainly golden on the part
of defenders of the faith, who are otherwise, as a
rule, loquacious enough. Nor has the taunt in
Aphorism <ref target='Sect_84'>84</ref> elicited an answer from the quarter
whither it was directed; and the <q>free</q> (not to say
dishonest) interpretation of the Bible by Christian
scholars and theologians, which is still proceeding
merrily, is now being turned to Nietzsche's own
writings. For the philosopher's works are now being
<q>explained away</q> by German theologians in a
most naïve and daring fashion, and with an ability
which has no doubt been acquired as the result of
centuries of skilful interpretation of the Holy Writ.
</p>

<p>
Nor are professional theologians the only ones
who have failed to answer Nietzsche; for in other
than religious matters the majority of savants
have not succeeded in plumbing his depths. There
is, for example, the question of race. Ten years
ago, twenty years after the publication of <hi rend='italic'>The
Dawn of Day</hi>, Nietzsche's countrymen enthusiastically
hailed a book which has recently been translated
into English, Chamberlain's <hi rend='italic'>Foundations of
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
the Nineteenth Century</hi>. In this book the Teutons
are said to be superior to all the other peoples in the
world, the reason given being that they have kept
their race pure. It is due to this purity of race that
they have produced so many great men; for every
<q>good</q> man in history is a Teuton, and every bad
man something else. Considerable skill is exhibited
by the author in filching from his opponents the
Latins their best trump cards, and likewise <emph>the</emph>
trump card, Jesus Christ, from the Jews; for Jesus
Christ, according to Chamberlain's very plausible
argument, was not a Jew but an Aryan, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a member
of that great family of which the Teutons are
a branch.
</p>

<p>
What would Nietzsche have said to this legerdemain?
He has constantly pointed out that the
Teutons are so far from being a pure race that they
have, on the contrary, done everything in their power
to ruin even the idea of a pure race for ever. For
the Teutons, through their Reformation and their
Puritan revolt in England, and the philosophies
developed by the democracies that necessarily followed,
were the spiritual forbears of the French
Revolution and of the Socialistic régime under
which we are beginning to suffer nowadays. Thus
this noble race has left nothing undone to blot out
the last remnant of race in Europe, and it even
stands in the way of the creation of a new race. And
with such a record in history the Germans write
books, eulogising themselves as the salt of the earth,
the people of peoples, the race of races, while in truth
they are nothing else than <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>nouveaux-riches</foreign> endeavouring
to draw up a decent pedigree for themselves.
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
We know that honesty is not a prerequisite
of such pedigrees, and that patriotism may be considered
as a good excuse even for a wrong pedigree;
but the race-pandemonium that followed the publication
of Mr. Chamberlain's book in Germany was
really a very unwise proceeding in view of the false
and misleading document produced. What, it may
be asked again, would Nietzsche have said if he had
heard his countrymen screaming odes to their own
glory as the <q>flower of Europe</q>? He would assuredly
have dismissed their exalted pretensions with a
good-natured smile; for his study of history had
shown him that even slaves must have their saturnalia
now and then. But as to his philosophical
answer there can be no doubt; for in Aphorism <ref target='Sect_272'>272</ref>
of <hi rend='italic'>The Dawn of Day</hi> there is a single sentence which
completely refutes the view of modern racemongers
like Chamberlain and his followers: <q>It is probable,</q>
we read, <q>that there are no pure races, but
only races which have become purified, and even
these are extremely rare.</q> There are even stronger
expressions to be met with in <q>Peoples and Countries</q>
(Aphorism 20; see the <hi rend='italic'>Genealogy of Morals</hi>,
p. 226): <q>What quagmires and mendacity must
there be about if it is possible, in the modern
European hotch-potch, to raise the question of
<q>race</q>!</q> and again, in Aphorism 21: <q>Maxim&mdash;to
associate with no man who takes any part in the
mendacious race-swindle.</q>
</p>

<p>
A man like Nietzsche, who makes so little impression
upon mankind in general, is certainly not,
as some people have thought and openly said, a
public danger, so the guardians of the State need not
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
be uneasy. There is little danger of Nietzsche's revolutionising
either the masses or the classes; for,
as Goethe used to say, <q>Seulement celui qui ressemble
le peuple, l'émeut.</q> Nietzsche's voice has as
yet hardly been lifted in this country; and, until it is
fully heard, both masses and classes will calmly proceed
on their way to the extremes of democracy and
anarchy, as they now appear to be doing. Anarchy,
though, may be too strong a word; for there is some
doubt whether, throughout Europe and America at
all events, the people are not now too weak even for
anarchy. A revolt is a sign of strength in a slave;
but our modern slaves have no strength left.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime, however, it will have become
clear that Nietzsche tried to stop this threatening
degradation of the human race, that he endeavoured
to supplant the morality of altruism&mdash;the cause of
this degradation&mdash;by another, a super-Christian
morality, and that he has succeeded in this aim, if
not where the masses and the classes are concerned,
at any rate in the case of that small minority of
thinkers to which he really wished to appeal. And
this minority is naturally grateful to the philosopher
for having supplied them with a morality which
enables them to be <q>good</q> without being fools&mdash;an
unpleasant combination which, unfortunately, the
Nazarene morality is seldom able to avoid. This
Nazarene morality has doubtless its own merits, and
its <q>good</q> and <q>evil</q> in many cases coincide with
ours; but common sense and certain intellectual
qualities are not too highly appreciated in the table
of Christian values (see, for instance, 1 Cor. iii. 19),
whence it will be observed that the enlightenment
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
of a Christian is not always quite equal to his
otherwise excellent intentions. We Nietzschians,
however, must show that patience to them which
they always pretend to show to their opponents.
Nietzsche himself, indeed, recommends this in Aphorism
<ref target='Sect_103'>103</ref> of this book, an aphorism which is almost
too well known to need repetition; for it likewise
disproves the grotesque though widely circulated
supposition that all kinds of immorality would be
indulged in under the sway of the <q>Immoralistic</q>
philosopher:
</p>

<p>
<q>I should not, of course, deny&mdash;unless I were a
fool&mdash;that many actions which are called immoral
should be avoided and resisted; and in the same way
that many which are called moral should be performed
and encouraged; but I hold that in both
cases these actions should be performed from
motives other than those which have prevailed up
to the present time. We must learn anew in order
that at last, perhaps very late in the day, we may be
able to do something more: feel anew.</q>
</p>

<p>
In regard to the translation itself&mdash;which owes
a good deal to many excellent suggestions made
by Mr. Thomas Common&mdash;it adheres, as a rule,
closely to the German text; and in only two or
three instances has a slightly freer rendering been
adopted in order to make the sense quite clear.
There are one or two cases in which a punning or
double meaning could not be adequately rendered
in English: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Aphorism <ref target='Sect_50'>50</ref>, where the German
word <q>Rausch</q> means both <q>intoxication</q> and also
<q>elation</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the exalted feelings of the religious
fanatic). Again, we have <q>Einleid,</q> <q>Einleidigkeit,</q>
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
in Aphorism <ref target='Sect_63'>63</ref>&mdash;words which do not quite
correspond to pity, compassion, or fellow-feeling,
and which, indeed, are not yet known to German
lexicographers. A literal translation, <q>one-feeling,</q>
would be almost meaningless. What is actually
signified is that both sufferer and sympathiser have
nerves and feelings in common: an experience which
Schopenhauer, as Nietzsche rightly points out, mistook
for compassion or pity (<q>Mitleid</q>), and which
lacked a word, even in German, until the later
psychologist coined <q>Einleid.</q> Again, in Aphorism
<ref target='Sect_554'>554</ref> we have a play upon the words <q>Vorschritt</q>
(leading, guidance) and <q>Fortschritt</q> (progress).
</p>

<p>
All these, however, are trifling matters in comparison
with the substance of the book, and they are of
more interest to philologists than to psychologists.
It is for psychologists that this book was written;
and such minds, somewhat rare in our time, may
read in it with much profit.
</p>

<p>
J. M. Kennedy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>London</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>September</hi> 1911.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Author's Preface.</head>

<p>
In this book we find a <q>subterrestrial</q> at work,
digging, mining, undermining. You can see him,
always provided that you have eyes for such deep
work,&mdash;how he makes his way slowly, cautiously,
gently but surely, without showing signs of the
weariness that usually accompanies a long privation
of light and air. He might even be called happy,
despite his labours in the dark. Does it not seem
as if some faith were leading him on, some solace
recompensing him for his toil? Or that he himself
desires a long period of darkness, an unintelligible,
hidden, enigmatic something, knowing as he does
that he will in time have his own morning, his
own redemption, his own rosy dawn?&mdash;Yea, verily
he will return: ask him not what he seeketh in the
depths; for he himself will tell you, this apparent
Trophonius and subterrestrial, whensoever he once
again becomes man. One easily unlearns how to
hold one's tongue when one has for so long been a
mole, and all alone, like him.&mdash;
</p>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
Indeed, my indulgent friends, I will tell you&mdash;here,
in this late preface,<note place='foot'>The book was first published in 1881, the preface being
added to the second edition, 1886.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note> which might easily have
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
become an obituary or a funeral oration&mdash;what
I sought in the depths below: for I have come
back, and&mdash;I have escaped. Think not that I will
urge you to run the same perilous risk! or that I
will urge you on even to the same solitude! For
whoever proceeds on his own path meets nobody:
this is the feature of one's <q>own path.</q> No one
comes to help him in his task: he must face everything
quite alone&mdash;danger, bad luck, wickedness,
foul weather. He goes his own way; and, as is
only right, meets with bitterness and occasional
irritation because he pursues this <q>own way</q> of
his: for instance, the knowledge that not even his
friends can guess who he is and whither he is going,
and that they ask themselves now and then: <q>Well?
Is he really moving at all? Has he still ... a
path before him?</q>&mdash;At that time I had undertaken
something which could not have been done by
everybody: I went down into the deepest depths;
I tunnelled to the very bottom; I started to investigate
and unearth an old <emph>faith</emph> which for thousands
of years we philosophers used to build on as the
safest of all foundations&mdash;which we built on again
and again although every previous structure fell
in: I began to undermine our <emph>faith in morals</emph>.
But ye do not understand me?&mdash;
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
So far it is on Good and Evil that we have
meditated least profoundly: this was always too
dangerous a subject. Conscience, a good reputation,
hell, and at times even the police, have not
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
allowed and do not allow of impartiality; in the
presence of morality, as before all authority, we
<emph>must</emph> not even think, much less speak: here we
must obey! Ever since the beginning of the world,
no authority has permitted itself to be made the
subject of criticism; and to criticise morals&mdash;to
look upon morality as a problem, as problematic&mdash;what!
was that not&mdash;<emph>is</emph> that not&mdash;immoral?&mdash;But
morality has at its disposal not only every means
of intimidation wherewith to keep itself free from
critical hands and instruments of torture: its
security lies rather in a certain art of enchantment,
in which it is a past master&mdash;it knows how to
<q>enrapture.</q> It can often paralyse the critical
will with a single look, or even seduce it to itself:
yea, there are even cases where morality can turn
the critical will against itself; so that then, like the
scorpion, it thrusts the sting into its own body.
Morality has for ages been an expert in all kinds
of devilry in the art of convincing: even at the
present day there is no orator who would not turn
to it for assistance (only hearken to our anarchists,
for instance: how morally they speak when they
would fain convince! In the end they even call
themselves <q>the good and the just</q>). Morality
has shown herself to be the greatest mistress of
seduction ever since men began to discourse and
persuade on earth&mdash;and, what concerns us philosophers
even more, she is the veritable <emph>Circe of
philosophers</emph>. For, to what is it due that, from
Plato onwards, all the philosophic architects in
Europe have built in vain? that everything which
they themselves honestly believed to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aere perennius</foreign>
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
threatens to subside or is already laid in ruins?
Oh, how wrong is the answer which, even in our own
day, rolls glibly off the tongue when this question is
asked: <q>Because they have all neglected the prerequisite,
the examination of the foundation, a
critique of all reason</q>&mdash;that fatal answer made by
Kant, who has certainly not thereby attracted us
modern philosophers to firmer and less treacherous
ground! (and, one may ask apropos of this, was it
not rather strange to demand that an instrument
should criticise its own value and effectiveness?
that the intellect itself should <q>recognise</q> its own
worth, power, and limits? was it not even just a
little ridiculous?) The right answer would rather
have been, that all philosophers, including Kant
himself were building under the seductive influence
of morality&mdash;that they aimed at certainty and
<q>truth</q> only in appearance; but that in reality
their attention was directed towards <q><emph>majestic moral
edifices</emph>,</q> to use once more Kant's innocent mode of
expression, who deems it his <q>less brilliant, but
not undeserving</q> task and work <q>to level the
ground and prepare a solid foundation for the
erection of those majestic moral edifices</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Critique
of Pure Reason</hi>, ii. 257). Alas! He did not
succeed in his aim, quite the contrary&mdash;as we must
acknowledge to-day. With this exalted aim, Kant
was merely a true son of his century, which more
than any other may justly be called the century
of exaltation: and this he fortunately continued
to be in respect to the more valuable side of this
century (with that solid piece of sensuality, for
example, which he introduced into his theory of
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
knowledge). He, too, had been bitten by the moral
tarantula, Rousseau; he, too, felt weighing on his
soul that moral fanaticism of which another disciple
of Rousseau's, Robespierre, felt and proclaimed
himself to be the executor: <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>de fonder sur la terre
l'empire de la sagesse, de la justice, et de la vertu</foreign>.
(Speech of June 4th, 1794.) On the other hand,
with such a French fanaticism in his heart, no one
could have cultivated it in a less French, more
deep, more thorough and more German manner&mdash;if
the word German is still permissible in this
sense&mdash;than Kant did: in order to make room for
<emph>his</emph> <q>moral kingdom,</q> he found himself compelled
to add to it an indemonstrable world, a logical
<q>beyond</q>&mdash;that was why he required his critique
of pure reason! In other words, <emph>he would not have
wanted it</emph>, if he had not deemed one thing to be
more important than all the others: to render his
moral kingdom unassailable by&mdash;or, better still,
invisible to, reason,&mdash;for he felt too strongly the
vulnerability of a moral order of things in the face
of reason. For, when confronted with nature and
history, when confronted with the ingrained <emph>immorality</emph>
of nature and history, Kant was, like all
good Germans from the earliest times, a pessimist:
he believed in morality, not because it is demonstrated
through nature and history, but despite its
being steadily contradicted by them. To understand
this <q>despite,</q> we should perhaps recall a
somewhat similar trait in Luther, that other great
pessimist, who once urged it upon his friends with
true Lutheran audacity: <q>If we could conceive by
reason alone how that God who shows so much
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
wrath and malignity could be merciful and just,
what use should we have for faith?</q> For, from
the earliest times, nothing has ever made a deeper
impression upon the German soul, nothing has
ever <q>tempted</q> it more, than that deduction, the
most dangerous of all, which for every true Latin
is a sin against the intellect: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credo quia absurdum
est</foreign>.&mdash;With it German logic enters for the first time
into the history of Christian dogma; but even to-day,
a thousand years later, we Germans of the present,
late Germans in every way, catch the scent of truth,
a <emph>possibility</emph> of truth, at the back of the famous
fundamental principle of dialectics with which
Hegel secured the victory of the German spirit
over Europe&mdash;<q>contradiction moves the world; all
things contradict themselves.</q> We are pessimists&mdash;even
in logic.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>4.</head>

<p>
But logical judgments are not the deepest and
most fundamental to which the daring of our
suspicion descends: the confidence in reason which
is inseparable from the validity of these judgments,
is, as confidence, a <emph>moral</emph> phenomenon ... perhaps
German pessimism has yet to take its last step?
Perhaps it has once more to draw up its <q>credo</q>
opposite its <q>absurdum</q> in a terrible manner?
And if this book is pessimistic even in regard to
morals, even above the confidence in morals&mdash;should
it not be a German book for that very reason?
For, in fact, it represents a contradiction, and one
which it does not fear: in it confidence in morals
is retracted&mdash;but why? Out of <emph>morality</emph>! Or how
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
shall we call that which takes place in it&mdash;in <emph>us</emph>?
for our taste inclines to the employment of more
modest phrases. But there is no doubt that to us
likewise there speaketh a <q>thou shalt</q>; we likewise
obey a strict law which is set above us&mdash;and this
is the last cry of morals which is still audible to us,
which we too must <emph>live</emph>: here, if anywhere, are we
still <emph>men of conscience</emph>, because, to put the matter in
plain words, we will not return to that which we look
upon as decayed, outlived, and superseded, we will
not return to something <q>unworthy of belief,</q>
whether it be called God, virtue, truth, justice, love
of one's neighbour, or what not; we will not permit
ourselves to open up a lying path to old ideals;
we are thoroughly and unalterably opposed to
anything that would intercede and mingle with us;
opposed to all forms of present-day faith and
Christianity; opposed to the lukewarmness of all
romanticism and fatherlandism; opposed also to the
artistic sense of enjoyment and lack of principle
which would fain make us worship where we no
longer believe&mdash;for we are artists&mdash;opposed, in
short, to all this European feminism (or idealism,
if this term be thought preferable) which everlastingly
<q>draws upward,</q> and which in consequence
everlastingly <q>lowers</q> and <q>degrades.</q> Yet, being
men of <emph>this</emph> conscience, we feel that we are related
to that German uprightness and piety which dates
back thousands of years, although we immoralists
and atheists may be the late and uncertain offspring
of these virtues&mdash;yea, we even consider ourselves,
in a certain respect, as their heirs, the executors of
their inmost will: a pessimistic will, as I have already
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
pointed out, which is not afraid to deny itself,
because it denies itself with <emph>joy</emph>! In us is consummated,
if you desire a formula&mdash;<emph>the autosuppression
of morals</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>5.</head>

<p>
But, after all, why must we proclaim so loudly
and with such intensity what we are, what we want,
and what we do not want? Let us look at this more
calmly and wisely; from a higher and more distant
point of view. Let us proclaim it, as if among ourselves,
in so low a tone that all the world fails to
hear it and <emph>us</emph>! Above all, however, let us say it
<emph>slowly</emph>.... This preface comes late, but not too late:
what, after all, do five or six years matter? Such a
book, and such a problem, are in no hurry; besides,
we are friends of the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>lento</foreign>, I and my book. I have
not been a philologist in vain&mdash;perhaps I am one
yet: a teacher of slow reading. I even come to
write slowly. At present it is not only my habit,
but even my taste&mdash;a perverted taste, maybe&mdash;to
write nothing but what will drive to despair every
one who is <q>in a hurry.</q> For philology is that venerable
art which exacts from its followers one thing
above all&mdash;to step to one side, to leave themselves
spare moments, to grow silent, to become slow&mdash;the
leisurely art of the goldsmith applied to language:
an art which must carry out slow, fine work, and
attains nothing if not <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>lento</foreign>. For this very reason
philology is now more desirable than ever before;
for this very reason it is the highest attraction and
incitement in an age of <q>work</q>: that is to say, of
haste, of unseemly and immoderate hurry-skurry,
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
which is intent upon <q>getting things done</q> at once,
even every book, whether old or new. Philology
itself, perhaps, will not <q>get things done</q> so
hurriedly: it teaches how to read <emph>well</emph>: <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> slowly,
profoundly, attentively, prudently, with inner
thoughts, with the mental doors ajar, with delicate
fingers and eyes ... my patient friends, this book
appeals only to perfect readers and philologists:
<emph>learn</emph> to read me well!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ruta, near Genoa</hi>,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Autumn</hi>, 1886.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book I.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Subsequent Judgment.</hi>&mdash;All things that endure
for a long time are little by little so greatly
permeated by reason that their origin in unreason
becomes improbable. Does not almost every exact
statement of an origin strike us as paradoxical and
sacrilegious? Indeed, does not the true historian
constantly contradict?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Prejudice of the Learned.</hi>&mdash;Savants are
quite correct in maintaining the proposition that
men in all ages believed that they <emph>knew</emph> what was
good and evil, praiseworthy and blamable. But it
is a prejudice of the learned to say <emph>that we now
know it better</emph> than any other age.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Time for Everything.</hi>&mdash;When man assigned
a sex to all things, he did not believe that he
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
was merely playing; but he thought, on the contrary,
that he had acquired a profound insight:&mdash;it
was only at a much later period, and then only partly,
that he acknowledged the enormity of his error. In
the same way, man has attributed a moral relationship
to everything that exists, throwing the cloak of
<emph>ethical significance</emph> over the world's shoulders. One
day all that will be of just as much value, and no
more, as the amount of belief existing to-day in the
masculinity or femininity of the sun.<note place='foot'>This refers, of course, to the different genders of the
nouns in other languages. In German, for example, the
sun is feminine, and in French masculine.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>4.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against the Fanciful Disharmony of the
Spheres.</hi>&mdash;We must once more sweep out of the
world all this <emph>false</emph> grandeur, for it is contrary to
the justice that all things about us may claim.
And for this reason we must not see or wish the
world to be more disharmonic than it is!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>5.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Be Thankful!</hi>&mdash;The most important result of
the past efforts of humanity is that we need no
longer go about in continual fear of wild beasts,
barbarians, gods, and our own dreams.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>6.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Juggler and his Counterpart.</hi>&mdash;That
which is wonderful in science is contrary to that
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
which is wonderful in the art of the juggler. For
the latter would wish to make us believe that we
see a very simple causality, where, in reality, an
exceedingly complex causality is in operation.
Science, on the other hand, forces us to give up our
belief in the simple causality exactly where everything
looks so easily comprehensible and we are
merely the victims of appearances. The simplest
things are <emph>very <q>complicated</q></emph>&mdash;we can never be
sufficiently astonished at them!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>7.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reconceiving Our Feeling of Space.</hi>&mdash;Is
it real or imaginary things which have built up the
greater proportion of man's happiness? It is
certain, at all events, that the extent of the distance
between the highest point of happiness and the
lowest point of unhappiness has been established
only with the help of imaginary things. As a consequence,
<emph>this</emph> kind of a conception of space is
always, under the influence of science, becoming
smaller and smaller: in the same way as science
has taught us, and is still teaching us, to look upon
the earth as small&mdash;yea, to look upon the entire
solar system as a mere point.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>8.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Transfiguration.</hi>&mdash;Perplexed sufferers, confused
dreamers, the hysterically ecstatic&mdash;here we
have the three classes into which Raphael divided
mankind. We no longer consider the world in this
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
light&mdash;and Raphael himself dare not do so: his own
eyes would show him a new transfiguration.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>9.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Conception of the Morality of Custom.</hi>&mdash;In
comparison with the mode of life which prevailed
among men for thousands of years, we men of the
present day are living in a very immoral age: the
power of custom has been weakened to a remarkable
degree, and the sense of morality is so refined and
elevated that we might almost describe it as volatilised.
That is why we late comers experience such
difficulty in obtaining a fundamental conception of
the origin of morality: and even if we do obtain it,
our words of explanation stick in our throats, so
coarse would they sound if we uttered them! or to
so great an extent would they seem to be a slander
upon morality! Thus, for example, the fundamental
clause: morality is nothing else (and, above
all, nothing more) than obedience to customs, of
whatsoever nature they may be. But customs are
simply the traditional way of acting and valuing.
Where there is no tradition there is no morality;
and the less life is governed by tradition, the
narrower the circle of morality. The free man is
immoral, because it is his <emph>will</emph> to depend upon himself
and not upon tradition: in all the primitive
states of humanity <q>evil</q> is equivalent to <q>individual,</q>
<q>free,</q> <q>arbitrary,</q> <q>unaccustomed,</q>
<q>unforeseen,</q> <q>incalculable.</q> In such primitive
conditions, always measured by this standard, any
action performed&mdash;<emph>not</emph> because tradition commands
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
it, but for other reasons (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> on account of its individual
utility), even for the same reasons as had
been formerly established by custom&mdash;is termed
immoral, and is felt to be so even by the very man
who performs it, for it has not been done out of
obedience to the tradition.
</p>

<p>
What is tradition? A higher authority, which
is obeyed, not because it commands what is
useful to us, but merely because it commands.
And in what way can this feeling for tradition
be distinguished from a general feeling of fear?
It is the fear of a higher intelligence which commands,
the fear of an incomprehensible power,
of something that is more than personal&mdash;there
is <emph>superstition</emph> in this fear. In primitive times
the domain of morality included education and
hygienics, marriage, medicine, agriculture, war,
speech and silence, the relationship between man
and man, and between man and the gods&mdash;morality
required that a man should observe her prescriptions
without thinking of <emph>himself</emph> as individual.
Everything, therefore, was originally custom, and
whoever wished to raise himself above it, had first
of all to make himself a kind of lawgiver and
medicine-man, a sort of demi-god&mdash;in other words,
he had to create customs, a dangerous and fearful
thing to do!&mdash;Who is the most moral man? On
the one hand, he who most frequently obeys the
law: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> he who, like the Brahmins, carries a consciousness
of the law about with him wherever he
may go, and introduces it into the smallest divisions
of time, continually exercising his mind in finding
opportunities for obeying the law. On the other
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
hand, he who obeys the law in the most difficult
cases. The most moral man is he who makes the
greatest <emph>sacrifices</emph> to morality; but what are the
greatest sacrifices? In answering this question
several different kinds of morality will be developed:
but the distinction between the morality
of the <emph>most frequent obedience</emph> and the morality of
the <emph>most difficult obedience</emph> is of the greatest importance.
Let us not be deceived as to the motives of
that moral law which requires, as an indication of
morality, obedience to custom in the most difficult
cases! Self-conquest is required, not by reason
of its useful consequences for the individual; but
that custom and tradition may appear to be dominant,
in spite of all individual counter desires and
advantages. The individual shall sacrifice himself&mdash;so
demands the morality of custom.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, those moralists who, like the
followers of Socrates, recommend self-control and
sobriety to the <emph>individual</emph> as his greatest possible
advantage and the key to his greatest personal
happiness, are <emph>exceptions</emph>&mdash;and if we ourselves do
not think so, this is simply due to our having been
brought up under their influence. They all take a
new path, and thereby bring down upon themselves
the utmost disapproval of all the representatives of
the morality of custom. They sever their connection
with the community, as immoralists, and are,
in the fullest sense of the word, evil ones. In the
same way, every Christian who <q>sought, above all
things, his <emph>own</emph> salvation,</q> must have seemed evil
to a virtuous Roman of the old school. Wherever
a community exists, and consequently also a
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
morality of custom, the feeling prevails that any
punishment for the violation of a custom is inflicted,
above all, on the community: this punishment is
a supernatural punishment, the manifestations
and limits of which are so difficult to understand,
and are investigated with such superstitious fear.
The community can compel any one member of it
to make good, either to an individual or to the
community itself, any ill consequences which may
have followed upon such a member's action. It can
also call down a sort of vengeance upon the head of
the individual by endeavouring to show that, as the
result of his action, a storm of divine anger has burst
over the community,&mdash;but, above all, it regards the
guilt of the individual more particularly as <emph>its own</emph>
guilt, and bears the punishment of the isolated individual
as its own punishment&mdash;<q>Morals,</q> they bewail
in their innermost heart, <q>morals have grown
lax, if such deeds as these are possible.</q> And every
individual action, every individual mode of thinking,
causes dread. It is impossible to determine
how much the more select, rare, and original minds
must have suffered in the course of time by being
considered as evil and dangerous, <emph>yea, because they
even looked upon themselves as such</emph>. Under the
dominating influence of the morality of custom,
originality of every kind came to acquire a bad
conscience; and even now the sky of the best minds
seems to be more overcast by this thought than it
need be.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>10.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Counter-motion between the Sense of
Morality and the Sense of Causality.</hi>&mdash;As
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
the sense of causality increases, so does the extent
of the domain of morality decrease: for every time
one has been able to grasp the necessary effects, and
to conceive them as distinct from all incidentals and
chance possibilities (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post hoc</foreign>), one has, at the same
time, destroyed an enormous number of <emph>imaginary
causalities</emph>, which had hitherto been believed in
as the basis of morals&mdash;the real world is much
smaller than the world of our imagination&mdash;and
each time also one casts away a certain amount
of one's anxiousness and coercion, and some of
our reverence for the authority of custom is lost:
morality in general undergoes a diminution. He
who, on the other hand, wishes to increase it must
know how to prevent results from becoming controllable.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>11.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Morals and Medicines of the People.</hi>&mdash;Every
one is continuously occupied in bringing
more or less influence to bear upon the morals which
prevail in a community: most of the people bring
forward example after example to show the <emph>alleged
relationship between cause and effect</emph>, guilt and
punishment, thus upholding it as well founded and
adding to the belief in it. A few make new observations
upon the actions and their consequences,
drawing conclusions therefrom and laying down
laws; a smaller number raise objections and allow
belief in these things to become weakened.&mdash;But
they are all alike in the crude and <emph>unscientific</emph>
manner in which they set about their work: if it is
a question of objections to a law, or examples or
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
observations of it, or of its proof, confirmation, expression
or refutation, we always find the material
and method entirely valueless, as valueless as the
material and form of all popular medicine. Popular
medicines and popular morals are closely related,
and should not be considered and valued, as is still
customary, in so different a way: both are most
dangerous and make-believe sciences.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>12.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Consequence as Adjuvant Cause.</hi>&mdash;Formerly
the consequences of an action were considered,
not as the result of that action, but a voluntary
adjuvant&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> on the part of God. Can a
greater confusion be imagined? Entirely different
practices and means have to be brought into use for
actions and effects!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>13.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Towards the New Education of Mankind.</hi>&mdash;Help
us, all ye who are well-disposed and willing
to assist, lend your aid in the endeavour to do away
with that conception of punishment which has swept
over the whole world! No weed more harmful than
this! It is not only to the consequences of our
actions that this conception has been applied&mdash;and
how horrible and senseless it is to confuse cause and
effect with cause and punishment!&mdash;but worse has
followed: the pure accidentality of events has been
robbed of its innocence by this execrable manner
of interpreting conception of punishment. Yea,
they have even pushed their folly to such extremes
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
that they would have us look upon existence itself
as a punishment&mdash;from which it would appear that
the education of mankind had hitherto been confided
to cranky gaolers and hangmen.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>14.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Signification of Madness in the
History of Morality.</hi>&mdash;If, despite that formidable
pressure of the <q>morality of custom,</q> under
which all human communities lived&mdash;thousands of
years before our own era, and during our own era
up to the present day (we ourselves are dwelling in
the small world of exceptions, and, as it were, in an
evil zone):&mdash;if, I say, in spite of all this, new and
divergent ideas, valuations, and impulses have made
their appearance time after time, this state of things
has been brought about only with the assistance of
a dreadful associate: it was insanity almost everywhere
that paved the way for the new thought and
cast off the spell of an old custom and superstition.
Do ye understand why this had to be done through
insanity? by something which is in both voice and
appearance as horrifying and incalculable as the
demoniac whims of wind and sea, and consequently
calling for like dread and respect? by something
bearing upon it the signs of entire lack of consciousness
as clearly as the convulsions and foam of the
epileptic, which appeared to typify the insane
person as the mask and speaking-trumpet of some
divine being? by something that inspired even the
bearer of the new thought with awe and fear of
himself, and that, suppressing all remorse, drove
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
him on to become its prophet and martyr?&mdash;Well,
in our own time, we continually hear the statement
reiterated that genius is tinctured with madness
instead of good sense. Men of earlier ages were
far more inclined to believe that, wherever traces
of insanity showed themselves, a certain proportion
of genius and wisdom was likewise present&mdash;something
<q>divine,</q> as they whispered to one another.
More than this, they expressed their opinions on
the point with sufficient emphasis. <q>All the greatest
benefits of Greece have sprung from madness,</q>
said Plato, setting on record the opinion of the
entire ancient world. Let us take a step further: all
those superior men, who felt themselves irresistibly
urged on to throw off the yoke of some morality
or other, had no other resource&mdash;<emph>if they were not
really mad</emph>&mdash;than to feign madness, or actually to
become insane. And this holds good for innovators
in every department of life, and not only in religion
and politics. Even the reformer of the poetic metre
was forced to justify himself by means of madness.
(Thus even down to gentler ages madness remained
a kind of convention in poets, of which Solon, for instance,
took advantage when urging the Athenians
to reconquer Salamis.)&mdash;<q>How can one make one's
self mad when one is not mad and dare not feign to
be so?</q> Almost all the eminent men of antiquity
have given themselves up to this dreadful mode of
reasoning: a secret doctrine of artifices and dietetic
jugglery grew up around this subject and was
handed down from generation to generation, together
with the feeling of the innocence, even sanctity, of
such plans and meditations. The means of becoming
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
a medicine-man among the Indians, a saint
among Christians of the Middle Ages, an angecok
among Greenlanders, a Pagee among Brazilians,
are the same in essence: senseless fasting, continual
abstention from sexual intercourse, isolation
in a wilderness, ascending a mountain or a pillar,
<q>sitting on an aged willow that looks out upon a
lake,</q> and thinking of absolutely nothing but what
may give rise to ecstasy or mental derangements.
</p>

<p>
Who would dare to glance at the desert of the
bitterest and most superfluous agonies of spirit, in
which probably the most productive men of all ages
have pined away? Who could listen to the sighs of
those lonely and troubled minds: <q>O ye heavenly
powers, grant me madness! Madness, that I at
length may believe in myself! Vouchsafe delirium
and convulsions, sudden flashes of light and periods
of darkness; frighten me with such shivering and
feverishness as no mortal ever experienced before,
with clanging noises and haunting spectres; let me
growl and whine and creep about like a beast, if
only I can come to believe in myself! I am devoured
by doubt. I have slain the law, and I now
dread the law as a living person dreads a corpse.
If I am not <emph>above</emph> the law, I am the most abandoned
of wretches. Whence cometh this new spirit that
dwelleth within me but from you? Prove to me,
then, that I am one of you&mdash;nothing but madness
will prove it to me.</q> And only too often does
such a fervour attain its object: at the very time
when Christianity was giving the greatest proof of
its fertility in the production of saints and martyrs,
believing that it was thus proving itself, Jerusalem
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
contained large lunatic asylums for shipwrecked
saints, for those whose last spark of good sense
had been quenched by the floods of insanity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>15.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The most Ancient Means of Solace.</hi>&mdash;First
stage: In every misfortune or discomfort
man sees something for which he must make somebody
else suffer, no matter who&mdash;in this way he
finds out the amount of power still remaining to
him; and this consoles him. Second stage: In
every misfortune or discomfort, man sees a punishment,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> an expiation of guilt and the means by
which he may get rid of the malicious enchantment
of a real or apparent wrong. When he perceives
the <emph>advantage</emph> which misfortune bring with it, he
believes he need no longer make another person
suffer for it&mdash;he gives up this kind of satisfaction,
because he now has another.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>16.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>First Principle of Civilisation.</hi>&mdash;Among
savage tribes there is a certain category of customs
which appear to aim at nothing but custom. They
therefore lay down strict, and, on the whole, superfluous
regulations (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the rules of the Kamchadales,
which forbid snow to be scraped off the boots
with a knife, coal to be stuck on the point of a
knife, or a piece of iron to be put into the fire&mdash;and
death to be the portion of every one who shall
act contrariwise!) Yet these laws serve to keep
people continually reminded of the custom, and
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
the imperative necessity on their parts to conform
to it: and all this in support of the great principle
which stands at the beginning of all civilisation:
any custom is better than none.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>17.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Goodness and Malignity.</hi>&mdash;At first men imposed
their own personalities on Nature: everywhere
they saw themselves and their like, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> their
own evil and capricious temperaments, hidden, as
it were, behind clouds, thunder-storms, wild beasts,
trees, and plants: it was then that they declared
Nature was evil. Afterwards there came a time,
that of Rousseau, when they sought to distinguish
themselves from Nature: they were so
tired of each other that they wished to have
separate little hiding-places where man and his
misery could not penetrate: then they invented
<q>nature is good.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>18.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Morality of Voluntary Suffering.</hi>&mdash;What
is the highest enjoyment for men living in
a state of war in a small community, the existence
of which is continually threatened, and the morality
of which is the strictest possible? <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> for souls which
are vigorous, vindictive, malicious, full of suspicion,
ready to face the direst events, hardened by privation
and morality? The enjoyment of cruelty:
just as, in such souls and in such circumstances, it
would be regarded as a virtue to be ingenious and
insatiable in cruelty. Such a community would
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
find its delight in performing cruel deeds, casting
aside, for once, the gloom of constant anxiety and
precaution. Cruelty is one of the most ancient
enjoyments at their festivities. As a consequence
it is believed that the gods likewise are pleased by
the sight of cruelty and rejoice at it&mdash;and in this
way the belief is spread that <emph>voluntary suffering</emph>,
self-chosen martyrdom, has a high signification
and value of its own. In the community custom
gradually brings about a practice in conformity
with this belief: henceforward people become more
suspicious of all exuberant well-being, and more
confident as they find themselves in a state of great
pain; they think that the gods may be unfavourable
to them on account of happiness, and favourable
on account of pain&mdash;not compassionate! For
compassion is looked upon with contempt, and unworthy
of a strong and awe-inspiring soul&mdash;but
agreeable to them, because the sight of human
suffering put these gods into good humour and
makes them feel powerful, and a cruel mind revels
in the sensation of power. It was thus that the
<q>most moral man</q> of the community was considered
as such by virtue of his frequent suffering,
privation, laborious existence, and cruel mortification&mdash;not,
to repeat it again and again, as a means
of discipline or self-control or a desire for individual
happiness&mdash;but a a virtue which renders
the evil gods well-disposed towards the community,
a virtue which continually wafts up to them the
odour of an expiatory sacrifice. All those intellectual
leaders of the nations who reached the
point of being able to stir up the sluggish though
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
prolific mire of their customs had to possess this
factor of voluntary martyrdom as well as insanity
in order to obtain belief&mdash;especially, and above all,
as is always the case, belief in themselves! The
more their minds followed new paths, and were
consequently tormented by pricks of conscience,
the more cruelly they battled against their own flesh,
their own desires, and their own health&mdash;as if they
were offering the gods a compensation in pleasure,
lest these gods should wax wroth at the neglect of
ancient customs and the setting up of new aims.
</p>

<p>
Let no one be too hasty in thinking that we have
now entirely freed ourselves from such a logic of
feeling! Let the most heroic souls among us
question themselves on this very point. The least
step forward in the domain of free thought and
individual life has been achieved in all ages to the
accompaniment of physical and intellectual tortures:
and not only the mere step forward, no! but every
form of movement and change has rendered necessary
innumerable martyrs, throughout the entire
course of thousands of years which sought their
paths and laid down their foundation-stones, years,
however, which we do not think of when we speak
about <q>world-history,</q> that ridiculously small
division of mankind's existence. And even in this
so-called world-history, which in the main is merely
a great deal of noise about the latest novelties,
there is no more important theme than the old,
old tragedy of the martyrs <emph>who tried to move the
mire</emph>. Nothing has been more dearly bought than
the minute portion of human reason and feeling of
liberty upon which we now pride ourselves. But
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
it is this very pride which makes it almost impossible
for us to-day to be conscious of that
enormous lapse of time, preceding the period of
<q>world-history</q> when <q>morality of custom</q> held
the field, and to consider this lapse of time as <emph>the
real and decisive epoch that established the character
of mankind</emph>: an epoch when suffering was considered
as a virtue, cruelty as a virtue, hypocrisy
as a virtue, revenge as a virtue, and the denial of
the reason as a virtue, whereas, on the other hand,
well-being was regarded as a danger, longing for
knowledge as a danger, peace as a danger, compassion
as a danger: an epoch when being pitied
was looked upon as an insult, work as an insult,
madness as a divine attribute, and every kind of
change as immoral and pregnant with ruin! You
imagine that all this has changed, and that
humanity must likewise have changed its character?
Oh, ye poor psychologists, learn to know yourselves
better!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>19.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Morality and Stupefaction.</hi>&mdash;Custom represents
the experiences of men of earlier times in
regard to what they considered as useful and harmful;
but the <emph>feeling of custom</emph> (morality) does not
relate to these feelings as such, but to the age, the
sanctity, and the unquestioned authority of the
custom. Hence this feeling hinders our acquiring
new experiences and amending morals: <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> morality
is opposed to the formation of new and better
morals: it stupefies.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>

<div>
<head>20.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Free-doers and Free-thinkers.</hi>&mdash;Compared
with free-thinkers, free-doers are at a disadvantage,
because it is evident that men suffer
more from the consequences of actions than of
thoughts. If we remember, however, that both
seek their own satisfaction, and that free-thinkers
have already found their satisfaction in reflection
upon and utterance of forbidden things, there is
no difference in the motives; but in respect of
the consequences the issue will be decided against
the free-thinker, provided that it be not judged
from the most superficial and vulgar external
appearance, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> not as every one would judge it.
We must make up for a good deal of the calumny
with which men have covered all those who have,
by their actions, broken away from the authority of
some custom&mdash;they are generally called criminals.
Every one who has hitherto overthrown a law of
established morality has always at first been considered
as a <emph>wicked man</emph>: but when it was afterwards
found impossible to re-establish the law, and
people gradually became accustomed to the change,
the epithet was changed by slow degrees. History
deals almost exclusively with these <emph>wicked men</emph>,
who later on came to be recognised as <emph>good men</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>21.</head>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Fulfilment of the Law.</hi></q>&mdash;In cases where
the observance of a moral precept has led to
different consequence from that expected and
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
promised, and does not bestow upon the moral man
the happiness he had hoped for, but leads rather to
misfortune and misery, the conscientious and timid
man has always his excuse ready: <q>Something
was lacking in the proper <emph>carrying out</emph> of the law.</q>
If the worst comes to the worst, a deeply-suffering
and down-trodden humanity will even decree: <q>It
is impossible to carry out the precept faithfully:
we are too weak and sinful, and, in the depths of
our soul, incapable of morality: consequently we
have no claim to happiness and success. Moral
precepts and promises have been given for better
beings than ourselves.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>22.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Works and Faith.</hi>&mdash;Protestant teachers are
still spreading the fundamental error that faith
only is of consequence, and that works must follow
naturally upon faith. This doctrine is certainly
not true, but it is so seductive in appearance that
it has succeeded in fascinating quite other intellects
than that of Luther (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the minds of Socrates and
Plato): though the plain evidence and experience
of our daily life prove the contrary. The most
assured knowledge and faith cannot give us either
the strength or the dexterity required for action,
or the practice in that subtle and complicated
mechanism which is a prerequisite for anything to
be changed from an idea into action. Then, I say,
let us first and foremost have works! and this
means practice! practice! practice! The necessary
faith will come later&mdash;be certain of that!
</p>

</div>

<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<div>
<head>23.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>In what Respect we are most Subtle.</hi>&mdash;By
the fact that, for thousands of years, <emph>things</emph>
(nature, tools, property of all kinds) were thought
to be alive and to possess souls, and able to hinder
and interfere with the designs of man, the feeling
of impotence among men has become greater and
more frequent than it need have been: for one
had to secure one's things like men and beasts,
by means of force, compulsion, flattery, treaties,
sacrifices&mdash;and it is here that we may find the
origin of the greater number of superstitious
customs, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> of an important, <emph>perhaps paramount</emph>,
and nevertheless wasted and useless division of
mankind's activity!&mdash;But since the feeling of impotence
and fear was so strong, and for such a
length of time in a state of constant stimulation,
the feeling of <emph>power</emph> in man has been developed in
so subtle a manner that, in this respect, he can
compare favourably with the most delicately-adjusted
balance. This feeling has become his
strongest propensity: and the means he discovered
for creating it form almost the entire history of
culture.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>24.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Proof of a Precept.</hi>&mdash;The worth or
worthlessness of a recipe&mdash;that for baking bread,
for example&mdash;is proved, generally speaking, by
the result expected coming to pass or not, provided,
of course, that the directions given have been carefully
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
followed. The case is different, however,
when we come to deal with moral precepts, for
here the results cannot be ascertained, interpreted,
and divined. These precepts, indeed, are based
upon hypotheses of but little scientific value, the
proof or refutation of which by means of results is
impossible:&mdash;but in former ages, when all science
was crude and primitive, and when a matter was
<emph>taken for granted</emph> on the smallest evidence, then
the worth or worthlessness of a moral recipe was
determined as we now determine any other precept:
by reference to the results. If the natives of Alaska
believe in a command which says: <q>Thou shalt not
throw a bone into the fire or give it to a dog,</q> this
will be proved by the warning: <q>If thou dost thou
wilt have no luck when hunting.</q> Yet, in one
sense or another, it almost invariably happens that
one has <q>no luck when hunting.</q> It is no easy
matter to <emph>refute</emph> the worth of the precept in this
way, the more so as it is the community, and not
the individual, which is regarded as the bearer of
the punishment; and, again, some occurrence is
almost certain to happen which seems to prove the
rule.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>25.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Customs and Beauty.</hi>&mdash;In justice to custom
it must not be overlooked that, in the case of all
those who conform to it whole-heartedly from the
very start, the organs of attack and defence, both
physical and intellectual, begin to waste away; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
these individuals gradually become more beautiful!
For it is the exercise of these organs and their corresponding
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
feelings that brings about ugliness and
helps to preserve it. It is for this reason that the
old baboon is uglier than the young one, and that
the young female baboon most closely resembles
man, and is hence the most handsome.&mdash;Let us
draw from this our own conclusions as to the origin
of female beauty!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>26.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Animals and Morals.</hi>&mdash;The rules insisted
upon in polite society, such, for example, as the
avoidance of everything ridiculous, fantastic, presumptuous;
the suppression of one's virtues just as
much as of one's most violent desires, the instant
bringing of one's self down to the general level, submitting
one's self to etiquette and self-depreciation:
all this, generally speaking, is to be found, as a
social morality, even in the lowest scale of the
animal world&mdash;and it is only in this low scale that
we see the innermost plan of all these amiable precautionary
regulations: one wishes to escape from
one's pursuers and to be aided in the search for
plunder. Hence animals learn to control and to
disguise themselves to such an extent that some
of them can even adapt the colour of their
bodies to that of their surroundings (by means
of what is known as the <q>chromatic function</q>).
Others can simulate death, or adopt the forms
and colours of other animals, or of sand, leaves,
moss, or fungi (known to English naturalists as
<q>mimicry</q>).
</p>

<p>
It is in this way that an individual conceals himself
behind the universality of the generic term
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
<q>man</q> or <q>society,</q> or adapts and attaches himself
to princes, castes, political parties, current
opinions of the time, or his surroundings: and we
may easily find the animal equivalent of all those
subtle means of making ourselves happy, thankful,
powerful, and fascinating. Even that sense of truth,
which is at bottom merely the sense of security, is
possessed by man in common with the animals: we
do not wish to be deceived by others or by ourselves;
we hear with some suspicion the promptings
of our own passions, we control ourselves and
remain on the watch against ourselves. Now, the
animal does all this as well as man; and in the
animal likewise self-control originates in the sense
of reality (prudence). In the same way, the animal
observes the effects it exercises on the imagination
of other beasts: it thus learns to view itself from
their position, to consider itself <q>objectively</q>; it
has its own degree of self-knowledge. The animal
judges the movements of its friends and foes, it
learns their peculiarities by heart and acts accordingly:
it gives up, once and for all, the struggle
against individual animals of certain species, and it
likewise recognises, in the approach of certain
varieties, whether their intentions are agreeable and
peaceful. The beginnings of justice, like those of
wisdom&mdash;in short, everything which we know as
the <emph>Socratic virtues</emph>&mdash;are of an <emph>animal</emph> nature: a
consequence of those instincts which teach us to
search for food and to avoid our enemies. If we
remember that the higher man has merely raised
and refined himself in the <emph>quality</emph> of his food and in
the conception of what is contrary to his nature, it
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
may not be going too far to describe the entire
moral phenomenon as of an animal origin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>27.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Value of the Belief in Superhuman
Passions.</hi>&mdash;The institution of marriage stubbornly
upholds the belief that love, although a passion, is
nevertheless capable of duration as such, yea, that
lasting, lifelong love may be taken as a general
rule. By means of the tenacity of a noble belief,
in spite of such frequent and almost customary
refutations&mdash;thereby becoming a <foreign rend='italic'>pia fraus</foreign>&mdash;marriage
has elevated love to a higher rank.
Every institution which has conceded to a passion
the <emph>belief in the duration of the latter</emph>, and responsibility
for this duration, in spite of the nature of
the passion itself, has raised the passion to a higher
level: and he who is thenceforth seized with such
a passion does not, as formerly, think himself
lowered in the estimation of others or brought into
danger on that account, but on the contrary believes
himself to be raised, both in the opinion of himself
and of his equals. Let us recall institutions and
customs which, out of the fiery devotion of a
moment, have created eternal fidelity; out of the
pleasure of anger, eternal vengeance; out of despair,
eternal mourning; out of a single hasty word,
eternal obligation. A great deal of hypocrisy and
falsehood came into the world as the result of such
transformations; but each time, too, at the cost of
such disadvantages, a new and <emph>superhuman</emph> conception
which elevates mankind.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<div>
<head>28.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>State of Mind as Argument.</hi>&mdash;Whence
arises within us a cheerful readiness for action?&mdash;such
is the question which has greatly occupied the
attention of men. The most ancient answer, and
one which we still hear, is: God is the cause; in
this way He gives us to understand that He approves
of our actions. When, in former ages, people
consulted the oracles, they did so that they might
return home strengthened by this cheerful readiness;
and every one answered the doubts which
came to him, if alternative actions suggested themselves,
by saying: <q>I shall do whatever brings
about that feeling.</q> They did not decide, in other
words, for what was most reasonable, but upon some
plan the conception of which imbued the soul with
courage and hope. A cheerful outlook was placed
in the scales as an argument and proved to be
heavier than reasonableness; for the state of mind
was interpreted in a superstitious manner as the
action of a god who promises success; and who,
by this argument, lets his reason speak as the
highest reasonableness. Now, let the consequences
of such a prejudice be considered when shrewd men,
thirsting for power, availed themselves of it&mdash;and
still do so! <q>Bring about the right state of mind!</q>&mdash;in
this way you can do without all arguments and
overcome every objection!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>29.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Actors of Virtue and Sin.</hi>&mdash;Among the
ancients who became celebrated for their virtue
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
there were many, it would seem, <emph>who acted to themselves</emph>,
especially the Greeks, who, being actors by
nature, must have acted quite unconsciously, seeing
no reason why they should not do so. In addition,
every one was striving to outdo some one else's
virtue with his own, so why should they not have
made use of every artifice to show off their virtues,
especially among themselves, if only for the sake of
practice! Of what use was a virtue which one could
not display, and which did not know how to display
itself!&mdash;Christianity put an end to the career of
these actors of virtue; instead it devised the disgusting
ostentation and parading of sins: it brought
into the world a state of <emph>mendacious sinfulness</emph> (even
at the present day this is considered as <foreign rend='italic'>bon ton</foreign>
among orthodox Christians).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>30.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Refined Cruelty as Virtue.</hi>&mdash;Here we have
a morality which is based entirely upon our thirst
for distinction&mdash;do not therefore entertain too high
an opinion of it! Indeed, we may well ask what
kind of an impulse it is, and what is its fundamental
signification? It is sought, by our appearance, to
grieve our neighbour, to arouse his envy, and to
awaken his feelings of impotence and degradation;
we endeavour to make him taste the bitterness of
his fate by dropping a little of <emph>our</emph> honey on his
tongue, and, while conferring this supposed benefit on
him, looking sharply and triumphantly into his eyes.
</p>

<p>
Behold such a man, now become humble, and
perfect in his humility&mdash;and seek those for whom,
through his humility, he has for a long time been
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
preparing a torture; for you are sure to find them!
Here is another man who shows mercy towards
animals, and is admired for doing so&mdash;but there
are certain people on whom he wishes to vent his
cruelty by this very means. Look at that great
artist: the pleasure he enjoyed beforehand in conceiving
the envy of the rivals he had outstripped,
refused to let his powers lie dormant until he became
a great man&mdash;how many bitter moments in the
souls of other men has he asked for as payment for
his own greatness! The nun's chastity: with what
threatening eyes she looks into the faces of other
women who live differently from her! what a vindictive
joy shines in those eyes! The theme is
short, and its variations, though they might well be
innumerable, could not easily become tiresome&mdash;for
it is still too paradoxical a novelty, and almost a
painful one, to affirm that the morality of distinction
is nothing, at bottom, but joy in refined cruelty.
When I say <q>at bottom,</q> I mean here, every time
in the first generation. For, when the habit of some
distinguished action becomes <emph>hereditary</emph>, its root, so
to speak, is not transmitted, but only its fruits (for
only feelings, and not thoughts, can become hereditary):
and, if we presuppose that this root is not
reintroduced by education, in the second generation
the joy in the cruelty is no longer felt: but only
pleasure in the habit as such. <emph>This</emph> joy, however,
is the first degree of the <q>good.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>31.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pride in Spirit.</hi>&mdash;The pride of man, which
strives to oppose the theory of our own descent
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
from animals and establishes a wide gulf between
nature and man himself&mdash;this pride is founded
upon a prejudice as to what the mind is; and this
prejudice is relatively recent. In the long prehistorical
period of humanity it was supposed that
the mind was everywhere, and men did not look
upon it as a particular characteristic of their own.
Since, on the contrary, everything spiritual (including
all impulses, maliciousness, and inclinations)
was regarded as common property, and consequently
accessible to everybody, primitive mankind
was not ashamed of being descended from animals
or trees (the noble races thought themselves
honoured by such legends), and saw in the spiritual
that which unites us with nature, and not that which
severs us from her. Thus man was brought up in
modesty&mdash;and this likewise was the result of a
prejudice.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>32.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Brake.</hi>&mdash;To suffer morally, and then to
learn afterwards that this kind of suffering was
founded upon an error, shocks us. For there is a
unique consolation in acknowledging, by our suffering,
a <q>deeper world of truth</q> than any other world,
and we would much rather suffer and feel ourselves
above reality by doing so (through the feeling that,
in this way, we approach nearer to that <q>deeper
world of truth</q>), than live without suffering and
hence without this feeling of the sublime. Thus
it is pride, and the habitual fashion of satisfying it,
which opposes this new interpretation of morality.
What power, then, must we bring into operation to
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
get rid of this brake? Greater pride? A new
pride?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>33.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Contempt of Causes, Consequences,
and Reality.</hi>&mdash;Those unfortunate occurrences
which take place at times in the community, such
as sudden storms, bad harvests, or plagues, lead
members of the community to suspect that offences
against custom have been committed, or that new
customs must be invented to appease a new demoniac
power and caprice. Suspicion and reasoning
of this kind, however, evade an inquiry into the
real and natural causes, and take the demoniac cause
for granted. This is one source of the hereditary
perversion of the human intellect; and the other
one follows in its train, for, proceeding on the same
principle, people paid much less attention to the real
and natural consequences of an action than to the
supernatural consequences (the so-called punishments
and mercies of the Divinity). It is commanded,
for instance, that certain baths are to be
taken at certain times: and the baths are taken,
not for the sake of cleanliness, but because the command
has been made. We are not taught to avoid
the real consequences of dirt, but merely the supposed
displeasure of the gods because a bath has
been omitted. Under the pressure of superstitious
fear, people began to suspect that these ablutions
were of much greater importance than they seemed;
they ascribed inner and supplementary meanings to
them, gradually lost their sense of and pleasure in
reality, and finally reality is considered as valuable
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
<emph>only to the extent that it is a symbol.</emph> Hence a man
who is under the influence of the morality of
custom comes to despise causes first of all, secondly
consequences, and thirdly reality, and weaves all his
higher feelings (reverence, sublimity, pride, gratitude,
love) <emph>into an imaginary world</emph>: the so-called
higher world. And even to-day we can see the
consequences of this: wherever, and in whatever
fashion, man's feelings are raised, that imaginary
world is in evidence. It is sad to have to say it;
but for the time being <emph>all higher sentiments</emph> must
be looked upon with suspicion by the man of
science, to so great an extent are they intermingled
with illusion and extravagance. Not that they
need necessarily be suspected <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign> and for ever;
but there is no doubt that, of all the gradual <emph>purifications</emph>
which await humanity, the purification of
the higher feelings will be one of the slowest.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>34.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moral Feelings and Conceptions.</hi>&mdash;It is
clear that moral feelings are transmitted in such a
way that children perceive in adults violent predilections
and aversions for certain actions, and
then, like born apes, imitate such likes and dislikes.
Later on in life, when they are thoroughly
permeated by these acquired and well-practised
feelings, they think it a matter of propriety and
decorum to provide a kind of justification for
these predilections and aversions. These <q>justifications,</q>
however, are in no way connected with the
origin or the degree of the feeling: people simply
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
accommodate themselves to the rule that, as rational
beings, they must give reasons for their pros and
cons, reasons which must be assignable and acceptable
into the bargain. Up to this extent the history
of the moral feelings is entirely different from the
history of moral conceptions. The first-mentioned
are powerful <emph>before</emph> the action, and the latter
especially after it, in view of the necessity for making
one's self clear in regard to them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>35.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Feelings and their Descent from Judgments.</hi>&mdash;<q>Trust
in your feelings!</q> But feelings
comprise nothing final, original; feelings are based
upon the judgments and valuations which are transmitted
to us in the shape of feelings (inclinations,
dislikes). The inspiration which springs from a
feeling is the grandchild of a judgment&mdash;often an
erroneous judgment!&mdash;and certainly not one's own
judgment! Trusting in our feelings simply means
obeying our grandfather and grandmother more
than the gods within <emph>ourselves</emph>: our reason and
experience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>36.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Foolish Piety, with <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Arrière-pensées</foreign>.</hi>&mdash;What!
the inventors of ancient civilisations, the
first makers of tools and tape lines, the first builders
of vehicles, ships, and houses, the first observers of
the laws of the heavens and the multiplication tables&mdash;is
it contended that they were entirely different
from the inventors and observers of our own time,
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
and superior to them? And that the first slow
steps forward were of a value which has not been
equalled by the discoveries we have made with all
our travels and circumnavigations of the earth?
It is the voice of prejudice that speaks thus, and
argues in this way to depreciate the importance of
the modern mind. And yet it is plain to be seen
that, in former times, hazard was the greatest of
all discoverers and observers and the benevolent
prompter of these ingenious ancients, and that, in
the case of the most insignificant invention now
made, a greater intellect, discipline, and scientific
imagination are required than formerly existed
throughout long ages.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>37.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wrong Conclusions From Usefulness.</hi>&mdash;When
we have demonstrated the highest utility of
a thing, we have nevertheless made no progress
towards an explanation of its origin; in other words,
we can never explain, by mere utility, the necessity
of existence. But precisely the contrary opinion
has been maintained up to the present time, even
in the domain of the most exact science. In
astronomy, for example, have we not heard it
stated that the (supposed) usefulness of the system
of satellites&mdash;(replacing the light which is diminished
in intensity by the greater distance of the
sun, in order that the inhabitants of the various
celestial bodies should not want for light)&mdash;was
the final object of this system and explained its
origin? Which may remind us of the conclusions
of Christopher Columbus The earth has been
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
created for man, ergo, if there are countries, they
must be inhabited. <q>Is it probable that the sun
would throw his rays on nothing, and that the
nocturnal vigils of the stars should be wasted upon
untravelled seas and unpeopled countries?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>38.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Impulses Transformed by Moral Judgments.</hi>&mdash;The
same impulse, under the impression
of the blame cast upon it by custom, develops into
the painful feeling of cowardice, or else the pleasurable
feeling of <emph>humility</emph>, in case a morality, like
that of Christianity, has taken it to its heart and
called it <emph>good</emph>. In other words, this instinct will
fall under the influence of either a good conscience
or a bad one! In itself, <emph>like every instinct</emph>, it does
not possess either this or indeed any other moral
character and name, or even a definite accompanying
feeling of pleasure or displeasure; it does not
acquire all these qualities as its second nature until
it comes into contact with impulses which have
already been baptized as good and evil, or has been
recognised as the attribute of beings already weighed
and valued by the people from a moral point of
view. Thus the ancient conception of envy differed
entirely from ours. Hesiod reckons it among the
qualities of the <emph>good</emph>, benevolent Eris, and it was
not considered as offensive to attribute some kind
of envy even to the gods. This is easy to understand
in a state of things inspired mainly by emulation,
but emulation was looked upon as good,
and valued accordingly.
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
The Greeks were likewise different from us in
the value they set upon hope: they conceived it as
blind and deceitful. Hesiod in one of his poems
has made a strong reference to it&mdash;a reference so
strong, indeed, that no modern commentator has
quite understood it; for it runs contrary to the
modern mind, which has learnt from Christianity
to look upon hope as a virtue. Among the Greeks,
on the other hand, the portal leading to a knowledge
of the future seemed only partly closed, and,
in innumerable instances, it was impressed upon
them as a religious obligation to inquire into the
future, in those cases where we remain satisfied with
hope. It thus came about that the Greeks, thanks
to their oracles and seers, held hope in small esteem,
and even lowered it to the level of an evil and a
danger.
</p>

<p>
The Jews, again, took a different view of anger
from that held by us, and sanctified it: hence they
have placed the sombre majesty of the wrathful
man at an elevation so high that a European cannot
conceive it. They moulded their wrathful and
holy Jehovah after the images of their wrathful
and holy prophets. Compared with them, all the
Europeans who have exhibited the greatest wrath
are, so to speak, only second-hand creatures.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>39.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Prejudice concerning <q>Pure Spirit.</q></hi>&mdash;Wherever
the doctrine of <emph>pure spirituality</emph> has
prevailed, its excesses have resulted in the destruction
of the tone of the nerves: it taught that the
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
body should be despised, neglected, or tormented,
and that, on account of his impulses, man himself
should be tortured and regarded with contempt.
It gave rise to gloomy, strained, and downcast
souls&mdash;who, besides, thought they knew the reason
of their misery and how it might possibly be relieved!
<q>It <emph>must</emph> be in the body! For it still
<emph>thrives</emph> too well!</q>&mdash;such was their conclusion,
whilst the fact was that the body, through its
agonies, protested time after time against this
never-ending mockery. Finally, a universal and
chronic hyper-nervousness seized upon those
virtuous representatives of the pure spirit: they
learned to recognise joy only in the shape of
ecstasies and other preliminary symptoms of insanity&mdash;and
their system reached its climax when
it came to look upon ecstasy as the highest aim
of life, and as the standard by which all earthly
things must be <emph>condemned</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>40.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meditations upon Observances.</hi>&mdash;Numerous
moral precepts, carelessly drawn from
a single event, quickly became incomprehensible;
it was as difficult a matter to deduce their intentions
with any degree of certainty as it was to
recognise the punishment which was to follow the
breaking of the rule. Doubts were even held regarding
the order of the ceremonies; but, while
people guessed at random about such matters,
the object of their investigations increased in importance,
it was precisely the greatest absurdity
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
of an observance that developed into a holy of
holies. Let us not think too little of the energy
wasted by man in this regard throughout thousands
of years, and least of all of the effects of
such <emph>meditations upon observances</emph>! Here we find
ourselves on the wide training-ground of the intellect&mdash;not
only do religions develop and continue
to increase within its boundaries: but here
also is the venerable, though dreadful, primeval
world of science; here grow up the poet, the
thinker, the physician, the lawgiver. The dread
of the unintelligible, which, in an ambiguous
fashion, demanded ceremonies from us, gradually
assumed the charm of the intricate, and where
man could not unravel he learnt to create.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>41.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To Determine the Value of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita
Contemplativa</foreign>.</hi>&mdash;Let us not forget, as men leading
a contemplative life, what kind of evil and
misfortunes have overtaken the men of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita
activa</foreign> as the result of contemplation&mdash;in short,
what sort of contra-account the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita activa</foreign> has to
offer <emph>us</emph>, if we exhibit too much boastfulness before
it with respect to our good deeds. It would show
us, in the first place, those so-called religious
natures, who predominate among the lovers of
contemplation and consequently represent their
commonest type. They have at all times acted in
such a manner as to render life difficult to practical
men, and tried to make them disgusted with it,
if possible: to darken the sky, to obliterate the
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
sun, to cast suspicion upon joy, to depreciate hope,
to paralyse the active hand&mdash;all this they knew
how to do, just as, for miserable times and feelings,
they had their consolations, alms, blessings, and
benedictions. In the second place, it can show us
the artists, a species of men leading the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign>,
rarer than the religious element, but
still often to be met with. As beings, these people
are usually intolerable, capricious, jealous, violent,
quarrelsome: this, however, must be deduced
from the joyous and exalting effects of their
works.
</p>

<p>
Thirdly, we have the philosophers, men who
unite religious and artistic qualities, combined,
however, with a third element, namely, dialectics
and the love of controversy. They are the authors
of evil in the same sense as the religious men and
artists, in addition to which they have wearied many
of their fellow-men with their passion for dialectics,
though their number has always been very small.
Fourthly, the thinkers and scientific workers.
They but rarely strove after effects, and contented
themselves with silently sticking to their own
groove. Thus they brought about little envy and
discomfort, and often, as objects of mockery and
derision, they served, without wishing to do so, to
make life easier for the men of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita activa</foreign>.
Lastly, science ended by becoming of much advantage
to all; and if, <emph>on account of this utility</emph>, many
of the men who were destined for the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita activa</foreign>
are now slowly making their way along the road
to science in the sweat of their brow, and not without
brain-racking and maledictions, this is not the
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
fault of the crowd of thinkers and scientific workers:
it is <q>self-wrought pain.</q><note place='foot'>M. Henri Albert points out that this refers to a line of Paul
Gerhardt's well-known song: <q>Befiel du deine Wege.</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>42.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Origin of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita Contemplativa</foreign>.</hi>&mdash;During
barbarous ages, when pessimistic judgments
held sway over men and the world, the individual,
in the consciousness of his full power, always endeavoured
to act in conformity with such judgments,
that is to say, he put his ideas into action
by means of hunting, robbery, surprise attacks,
brutality, and murder: including the weaker forms
of such acts, as far as they are tolerated within the
community. When his strength declines, however,
and he feels tired, ill, melancholy, or satiated&mdash;consequently
becoming temporarily void of wishes
or desires&mdash;he is a relatively better man, that is
to say, less dangerous; and his pessimistic ideas
will now discharge themselves only in words and
reflections&mdash;upon his companions, for example, or
his wife, his life, his gods,&mdash;his judgments will be
<emph>evil</emph> ones. In this frame of mind he develops into
a thinker and prophet, or he adds to his superstitions
and invents new observances, or mocks his
enemies. Whatever he may devise, however, all
the productions of his brain will necessarily reflect
his frame of mind, such as the increase of fear and
weariness, and the lower value he attributes to
action and enjoyment. The substance of these
productions must correspond to the substance of
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
these poetic, thoughtful, and priestly moods; the
evil judgment must be supreme.
</p>

<p>
In later years, all those who acted continuously
as this man did in those special circumstances&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
those who gave out pessimistic judgments, and
lived a melancholy life, poor in action&mdash;were called
poets, thinkers, priests, or <q>medicine-men.</q> The
general body of men would have liked to disregard
such people, because they were not active enough,
and to turn them out of the community; but there
was a certain risk in doing so: these inactive men
had found out and were following the tracks of
superstition and divine power, and no one doubted
that they had unknown means of power at their
disposal. This was the value which was set upon
<emph>the ancient race of contemplative natures</emph>&mdash;despised
as they were in just the same degree as they were
not dreaded! In such a masked form, in such an
ambiguous aspect, with an evil heart and often with
a troubled head, did Contemplation make its first
appearance on earth: both weak and terrible at
the same time, despised in secret, and covered in
public with every mark of superstitious veneration.
Here, as always, we must say: <foreign rend='italic'>pudenda origo</foreign>!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>43.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How many Forces must now be united
in a Thinker.</hi>&mdash;To rise superior to considerations
of the senses, to raise one's self to abstract contemplations:
this is what was formerly regarded
as <emph>elevation</emph>; but now it is not practicable for us
to share the same feelings. Luxuriating in the
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
most shadowy images of words and things; playing
with those invisible, inaudible, imperceptible
beings, was considered as existence in another
and <emph>higher</emph> world, a world that sprang from the deep
contempt felt for the world which was perceptible
to the senses, this seductive and wicked world
of ours. <q>These <foreign rend='italic'>abstracta</foreign> no longer mislead us,
but they may lead us</q>&mdash;with such words men
soared aloft. It was not the <emph>substance</emph> of these
intellectual sports, but the sports themselves, which
was looked upon as <q>the higher thing</q> in the
primeval ages of science. Hence we have Plato's
admiration for dialectics, and his enthusiastic belief
in the necessary relationship of dialectics to the
good man who has risen superior to the considerations
of his senses. It was not only knowledge
that was discovered little by little, but also the
different means of acquiring it, the conditions and
operations which precede knowledge in man. And
it always seemed as if the newly-discovered operation
or the newly-experienced condition were not
a means of acquiring knowledge, but was even the
substance, goal, and sum-total of everything that
was worth knowing. What does the thinker require?&mdash;imagination,
inspiration, abstraction,
spirituality, invention, presentiment, induction,
dialectics, deduction, criticism, ability to collect
materials, an impersonal mode of thinking, contemplation,
comprehensiveness, and lastly, but not
least, justice, and love for everything that exists&mdash;but
each one of these means was at one time considered,
in the history of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign>, as
a goal and final purpose, and they all secured for
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
their inventors that perfect happiness which fills
the human soul when its final purpose dawns upon
it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>44.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Origin and Meaning.</hi>&mdash;Why does this
thought come into my mind again and again,
always in more and more vivid colours?&mdash;that, in
former times, investigators, in the course of their
search for the origin of things, always thought that
they found something which would be of the highest
importance for all kinds of action and judgment:
yea, that they even invariably postulated that the
salvation of mankind depended upon <emph>insight into
the origin of things</emph>&mdash;whereas now, on the other
hand, the more we examine into origins, the less
do they concern our interests: on the contrary,
all the valuations and interestedness which we
have placed upon things begin to lose their meaning,
the more we retrogress where knowledge is
concerned and approach the things themselves.
<emph>The origin becomes of less significance in proportion
as we acquire insight into it</emph>; whilst things nearest
to ourselves, around and within us, gradually begin
to manifest their wealth of colours, beauties,
enigmas, and diversity of meaning, of which earlier
humanity never dreamed. In former ages thinkers
used to move furiously about, like wild animals in
cages, steadily glaring at the bars which hemmed
them in, and at times springing up against them
in a vain endeavour to break through them: and
happy indeed was he who could look through a
gap to the outer world and could fancy that
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
he saw something of what lay beyond and afar
off.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>45.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Tragic Termination to Knowledge.</hi>&mdash;Of
all the means of exaltation, human sacrifices
have at times done most to elevate man. And
perhaps the one powerful thought&mdash;the idea of
<emph>self-sacrificing humanity</emph>&mdash;might be made to prevail
over every other aspiration, and thus to prove
the victor over even the most victorious. But to
whom should the sacrifice be made? We may
already swear that, if ever the constellation of such
an idea appeared on the horizon, the knowledge of
truth would remain the single but enormous object
with which a sacrifice of such a nature would be
commensurate&mdash;because no sacrifice is too great
for it. In the meantime the problem has never
been expounded as to how far humanity, considered
as a whole, could take steps to encourage
the advancement of knowledge; and even less as
to what thirst for knowledge could impel humanity
to the point of sacrificing itself with the light of an
anticipated wisdom in its eyes. When, perhaps, with
a view to the advancement of knowledge, we are
able to enter into communication with the inhabitants
of other stars, and when, during thousands of
years, wisdom will have been carried from star to
star, the enthusiasm of knowledge may rise to such
a dizzy height!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>46.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Doubt in Doubt.</hi>&mdash;<q>What a good pillow doubt
is for a well-balanced head!</q> This saying of
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
Montaigne always made Pascal angry, for nobody
ever wanted a good pillow so much as he did.
Whatever was the matter with him?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>47.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words block up our Path.</hi>&mdash;Wherever
primitive men put down a word, they thought they
had made a discovery. How different the case
really was!&mdash;they had come upon a problem, and,
while they thought they had solved it, they had in
reality placed an obstacle in the way of its solution.
Now, with every new piece of knowledge, we stumble
over petrified words and mummified conceptions, and
would rather break a leg than a word in doing so.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>48.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Know Thyself</q> is the Whole of Science.</hi>&mdash;Only
when man shall have acquired a knowledge
of all things will he be able to know himself. For
things are but the boundaries of man.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>49.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The New Fundamental Feeling: our
Final Corruptibility.</hi>&mdash;In former times people
sought to show the feeling of man's greatness by
pointing to his divine descent. This, however, has
now become a forbidden path, for the ape stands at
its entrance, and likewise other fearsome animals,
showing their teeth in a knowing fashion, as if to
say, No further this way! Hence people now try the
opposite direction: the road along which humanity
is proceeding shall stand as an indication of their
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
greatness and their relationship to God. But alas!
this, too, is useless! At the far end of this path
stands the funeral urn of the last man and grave-digger
(with the inscription, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil humani a me
alienum puto</foreign>). To whatever height mankind may
have developed&mdash;and perhaps in the end it will not
be so high as when they began!&mdash;there is as little
prospect of their attaining to a higher order as there
is for the ant and the earwig to enter into kinship
with God and eternity at the end of their career on
earth. What is to come will drag behind it that
which has passed: why should any little star, or
even any little species on that star, form an exception
to that eternal drama? Away with such sentimentalities!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_50'/>
<head>50.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Belief in Inebriation.</hi>&mdash;Those men who have
moments of sublime ecstasy, and who, on ordinary
occasions, on account of the contrast and the excessive
wearing away of their nervous forces, usually
feel miserable and desolate, come to consider such
moments as the true manifestation of their real
selves, of their <q>ego,</q> and their misery and dejection,
on the other hand, as the <emph>effect of the <q>non-ego</q></emph>.
This is why they think of their environment,
the age in which they live, and the whole world in
which they have their being, with feelings of
vindictiveness. This intoxication appears to them
as their true life, their actual ego; and everywhere
else they see only those who strive to oppose and
prevent this intoxication, whether of an intellectual,
moral, religious, or artistic nature.
</p>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<p>
Humanity owes no small part of its evils to these
fantastic enthusiasts; for they are the insatiable
sowers of the weed of discontent with one's self and
one's neighbour, of contempt for the world and the
age, and, above all, of world-lassitude. An entire
hell of criminals could not, perhaps, bring about
such unfortunate and far-reaching consequences,
such heavy and disquieting effects that corrupt
earth and sky, as are brought about by that
<q>noble</q> little community of unbridled, fantastic,
half-mad people&mdash;of geniuses, too&mdash;who cannot
control themselves, or experience any inward joy,
until they have lost themselves completely: while,
on the other hand, the criminal often gives a proof
of his admirable self-control, sacrifice, and wisdom,
and thus maintains these qualities in those who fear
him. Through him life's sky may at times seem
overcast and threatening, but the atmosphere ever
remains brisk and vigorous.&mdash;Furthermore, these
enthusiasts bring their entire strength to bear on
the task of imbuing mankind with belief in inebriation
as in life itself: a dreadful belief! As savages
are now quickly corrupted and ruined by <q>fire-water,</q>
so likewise has mankind in general been
slowly though thoroughly corrupted by these
spiritual <q>fire-waters</q> of intoxicating feelings and
by those who keep alive the craving for them. It
may yet be ruined thereby.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>51.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Such as we still are.</hi>&mdash;<q>Let us be indulgent
to the great one-eyed!</q> said Stuart Mill, as if it
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
were necessary to ask for indulgence when we are
willing to believe and almost to worship them. I
say: Let us be indulgent towards the two-eyed,
both great and small; for, <emph>such as we are now</emph>, we
shall never rise beyond indulgence!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>52.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where are the New Physicians of the
Soul?</hi>&mdash;It is the means of consolation which have
stamped life with that fundamental melancholy
character in which we now believe: the worst
disease of mankind has arisen from the struggle
against diseases, and apparent remedies have in the
long run brought about worse conditions than those
which it was intended to remove by their use. Men,
in their ignorance, used to believe that the stupefying
and intoxicating means, which appeared to act
immediately, the so-called <q>consolations,</q> were the
true healing powers: they even failed to observe
that they had often to pay for their immediate relief
by a general and profound deterioration in health,
that the sick ones had to suffer from the after-effects
of the intoxication, then from the absence of the
intoxication, and, later on, from a feeling of disquietude,
depression, nervous starts, and ill-health.
Again, men whose illness had advanced to a certain
extent never recovered from it&mdash;those physicians
of the soul, universally believed in and worshipped
as they were, took care of that.
</p>

<p>
It has been justly said of Schopenhauer that he
was one who again took the sufferings of humanity
seriously: where is the man who will at length take
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
the antidotes against these sufferings seriously, and
who will pillory the unheard-of quackery with which
men, even up to our own age, and in the most
sublime nomenclature, have been wont to treat
the illnesses of their souls?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>53.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Abuse of the Conscientious Ones.</hi>&mdash;It is
the conscientious, and not the unscrupulous, who
have suffered so greatly from exhortations to
penitence and the fear of hell, especially if they
happened to be men of imagination. In other words,
a gloom has been cast over the lives of those who
had the greatest need of cheerfulness and agreeable
images&mdash;not only for the sake of their own consolation
and recovery from themselves, but that
humanity itself might take delight in them and
absorb a ray of their beauty. Alas, how much
superfluous cruelty and torment have been brought
about by those religions which invented sin! and
by those men who, by means of such religions,
desired to reach the highest enjoyment of their
power!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>54.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thoughts on Disease.</hi>&mdash;To soothe the imagination
of the patient, in order that he may at
least no longer keep on thinking about his illness,
and thus suffer more from such thoughts than from
the complaint itself, which has been the case
hitherto&mdash;that, it seems to me, is something! and
it is by no means a trifle! And now do ye understand
our task?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<div>
<head>55.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The <q>Ways.</q></hi>&mdash;So-called <q>short cuts</q> have
always led humanity to run great risks: on hearing
the <q>glad tidings</q> that a <q>short cut</q> had been
found, they always left the straight path&mdash;<emph>and lost
their way</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>56.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Apostate of the Free Spirit.</hi>&mdash;Is
there any one, then, who seriously dislikes pious
people who hold formally to their belief? Do we
not, on the contrary, regard them with silent esteem
and pleasure, deeply regretting at the same time
that these excellent people do not share our own
feelings? But whence arises that sudden, profound,
and unreasonable dislike for the man who, having
at one time possessed freedom of spirit, finally
becomes a <q>believer</q>? In thinking of him we
involuntarily experience the sensation of having
beheld some loathsome spectacle, which we must
quickly efface from our recollection. Should we
not turn our backs upon even the most venerated
man if we entertained the least suspicion of him
in this regard? Not, indeed, from a moral point
of view, but because of sudden disgust and horror!
Whence comes this sharpness of feeling? Perhaps
we shall be given to understand that, at bottom,
we are not quite certain of our own selves? Or
that, early in life, we build round ourselves hedges
of the most pointed contempt, in order that, when
old age makes us weak and forgetful, we may not
feel inclined to brush our own contempt away from
us?
</p>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<p>
Now, speaking frankly, this suspicion is quite
erroneous, and whoever forms it knows nothing of
what agitates and determines the free spirit: how
little, to him, does the <emph>changing</emph> of an opinion seem
contemptible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>! On the contrary, how highly
he prizes the <emph>ability</emph> to change an opinion as a rare
and valuable distinction, especially if he can retain
it far into old age! And his pride (not his pusillanimity)
even reaches so high as to be able to
pluck the fruits of the <foreign rend='italic'>spernere se sperni</foreign> and the
<foreign rend='italic'>spernere se ipsum</foreign>: without his being troubled by
the sensation of fear of vain and easy-going men.
Furthermore, the doctrine of the innocence of all
opinions appears to him to be as certain as the
doctrine of the innocence of all actions: how could
he act as judge and hangman before the apostate
of intellectual liberty! On the contrary, the sight
of such a person would disgust him as much as
the sight of a nauseous illness disgusts the physician:
the physical repulsion caused by everything
spongy, soft, and suppurating momentarily overcomes
reason and the desire to help. Hence our
goodwill is overcome by the conception of the
monstrous dishonesty which must have gained the
upper hand in the apostate from the free spirit:
by the conception of a general gnawing which is
eating its way down even to the framework of the
character.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>57.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Other Fears, other Safeties.</hi>&mdash;Christianity
overspread life with a new and unlimited
<emph>insecurity</emph>, thereby creating new safeties, enjoyments
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
and recreations, and new valuations of all
things. Our own century denies the existence of
this insecurity, and does so with a good conscience,
yet it clings to the old habit of Christian
certainties, enjoyments, recreations, and valuations!&mdash;even
in its noblest arts and philosophies. How
feeble and worn out must all this now seem, how
imperfect and clumsy, how arbitrarily fanatical,
and, above all, how uncertain: now that its horrible
contrast has been taken away&mdash;the ever-present
fear of the Christian for his <emph>eternal</emph> salvation!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>58.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Christianity and the Emotions.</hi>&mdash;In Christianity
we may see a great popular protest against
philosophy: the reasoning of the sages of antiquity
had withdrawn men from the influence of the
emotions, but Christianity would fain give men
their emotions back again. With this aim in view,
it denies any moral value to virtue such as philosophers
understood it&mdash;as a victory of the reason
over the passions&mdash;generally condemns every kind
of goodness, and calls upon the passions to manifest
themselves in their full power and glory: as <emph>love</emph> of
God, <emph>fear</emph> of God, fanatic <emph>belief</emph> in God, blind <emph>hope</emph>
in God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>59.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Error as a Cordial.</hi>&mdash;Let people say what
they will, it is nevertheless certain that it was the
aim of Christianity to deliver mankind from the
yoke of moral engagements by indicating what it
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
believed to be the <emph>shortest way to perfection</emph>: exactly
in the same manner as a few philosophers thought
they could dispense with tedious and laborious
dialectics, and the collection of strictly-proved
facts, and point out a royal road to truth. It
was an error in both cases, but nevertheless a great
cordial for those who were worn out and despairing
in the wilderness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>60.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>All Spirit finally becomes Visible.</hi>&mdash;Christianity
has assimilated the entire spirituality
of an incalculable number of men who were by
nature submissive, all those enthusiasts of humiliation
and reverence, both refined and coarse. It has
in this way freed itself from its own original rustic
coarseness&mdash;of which we are vividly reminded when
we look at the oldest image of St. Peter the Apostle&mdash;and
has become a very intellectual religion,
with thousands of wrinkles, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>arrière-pensées</foreign>, and
masks on its face. It has made European humanity
more clever, and not only cunning from a theological
standpoint. By the spirit which it has thus
given to European humanity&mdash;in conjunction with
the power of abnegation, and very often in conjunction
with the profound conviction and loyalty of
that abnegation&mdash;it has perhaps chiselled and shaped
the most subtle individualities which have ever
existed in human society: the individualities of the
higher ranks of the Catholic clergy, especially when
these priests have sprung from a noble family, and
have brought to their work, from the very beginning,
the innate grace of gesture, the dominating glance
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
of the eye, and beautiful hands and feet. Here the
human face acquires that spiritualisation brought
about by the continual ebb and flow of two kinds
of happiness (the feeling of power and the feeling
of submission) after a carefully-planned manner
of living has conquered the beast in man. Here
an activity, which consists in blessing, forgiving
sins, and representing the Almighty, ever keeps
alive in the soul, <emph>and even in the body</emph>, the consciousness
of a supreme mission; here we find that noble
contempt concerning the perishable nature of the
body, of well-being, and of happiness, peculiar to
born soldiers: their <emph>pride</emph> lies in obedience, a distinctly
aristocratic trait; their excuse and their
idealism arise from the enormous impossibility of
their task. The surpassing beauty and subtleties
of these princes of the Church have always proved
to the people the truth of the Church; a momentary
brutalisation of the clergy (such as came about in
Luther's time) always tended to encourage the contrary
belief. And would it be maintained that this
result of beauty and human subtlety, shown in
harmony of figure, intellect, and task, would come
to an end with religions? and that nothing higher
could be obtained, or even conceived?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>61.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Needful Sacrifice.</hi>&mdash;Those earnest,
able, and just men of profound feelings, who
are still Christians at heart, owe it to themselves
to make one attempt to live for a certain space
of time without Christianity! they owe it <emph>to their
faith</emph> that they should thus for once take up their
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
abode <q>in the wilderness</q>&mdash;if for no other reason
than that of being able to pronounce on the question
as to whether Christianity is needful. So far,
however, they have confined themselves to their
own narrow domain and insulted every one who
happened to be outside of it: yea, they even become
highly irritated when it is suggested to them
that beyond this little domain of theirs lies the great
world, and that Christianity is, after all, only a corner
of it! No; your evidence on the question will be
valueless until you have lived year after year without
Christianity, and with the inmost desire to
continue to exist without it: until, indeed, you have
withdrawn far, far away from it. It is not when
your nostalgia urges you back again, but when your
judgment, based on a strict comparison, drives you
back, that your homecoming has any significance!&mdash;Men
of coming generations will deal in this
manner with all the valuations of the past; they
must be voluntarily <emph>lived</emph> over again, together with
their contraries, in order that such men may finally
acquire the right of shifting them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>62.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On the Origin of Religions.</hi>&mdash;How can
any one regard his own opinion of things as a revelation?
This is the problem of the formation
of religions: there has always been some man in
whom this phenomenon was possible. A postulate
is that such a man already believed in revelations.
Suddenly, however, a new idea occurs to him one
day, <emph>his</emph> idea; and the entire blessedness of a great
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
personal hypothesis, which embraces all existence
and the whole world, penetrates with such force
into his conscience that he dare not think himself
the creator of such blessedness, and he therefore
attributes to his God the cause of this new idea and
likewise the cause of the cause, believing it to be
the revelation of his God. How could a man be
the author of so great a happiness? ask his pessimistic
doubts. But other levers are secretly at
work: an opinion may be strengthened by one's
self if it be considered as a revelation; and in this
way all its hypothetic nature is removed; the matter
is set beyond criticism and even beyond doubt: it
is sanctified. It is true that, in this way, a man
lowers himself to playing the rôle of <q>mouthpiece,</q>
but his thought will end by being victorious as a
divine thought&mdash;the feeling of finally gaining the
victory conquers the feeling of degradation. There
is also another feeling in the background: if a man
raises his products above himself, and thus apparently
detracts from his own worth, there nevertheless
remains a kind of joyfulness, paternal love, and
paternal pride, which compensates man&mdash;more than
compensates man&mdash;for everything.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_63'/>
<head>63.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hatred of One's Neighbour.</hi>&mdash;Supposing
that we felt towards our neighbour as he does himself&mdash;Schopenhauer
calls this compassion, though it
would be more correct to call it auto-passion, fellow-feeling&mdash;we
should be compelled to hate him, if, like
Pascal, he thought himself hateful. And this was
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
probably the general feeling of Pascal regarding
mankind, and also that of ancient Christianity,
which, under Nero, was <q>convicted</q> of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>odium
generis humani</foreign>, as Tacitus has recorded.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>64.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Broken-Hearted Ones.</hi>&mdash;Christianity
has the instinct of a hunter for finding out all those
who may by hook or by crook be driven to despair&mdash;only
a very small number of men can be brought
to this despair. Christianity lies in wait for such
as those, and pursues them. Pascal made an attempt
to find out whether it was not possible, with the
help of the very subtlest knowledge, to drive everybody
into despair. He failed: to his second despair.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>65.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brahminism and Christianity.</hi>&mdash;There are
certain precepts for obtaining a consciousness of
power: on the one hand, for those who already
know how to control themselves, and who are therefore
already quite used to the feeling of power; and,
on the other hand, for those who cannot control
themselves. Brahminism has given its care to the
former type of man; Christianity to the latter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>66.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Faculty of Vision.</hi>&mdash;During the whole
of the Middle Ages it was believed that the real distinguishing
trait of higher men was the faculty of
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
having visions&mdash;that is to say, of having a grave
mental trouble. And, in fact, the rules of life of all
the higher natures of the Middle Ages (the religiosi)
were drawn up with the object of making man capable
of vision! Little wonder, then, that the exaggerated
esteem for these half-mad fanatics, so-called
men of genius, has continued even to our own days.
<q>They have seen things that others do not see</q>&mdash;no
doubt! and this fact should inspire us with caution
where they are concerned, and not with belief!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>67.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Price of Believers.</hi>&mdash;He who sets such
a value on being believed in has to promise heaven
in recompense for this belief: and every one, even
a thief on the Cross, must have suffered from a
terrible doubt and experienced crucifixion in every
form: otherwise he would not buy his followers so
dearly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_68'/>
<head>68.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The First Christian.</hi>&mdash;The whole world still
believes in the literary career of the <q>Holy Ghost,</q>
or is still influenced by the effects of this belief:
when we look into our Bibles we do so for the
purpose of <q>edifying ourselves,</q> to find a few words
of comfort for our misery, be it great or small&mdash;in
short, we read ourselves into it and out of it.
But who&mdash;apart from a few learned men&mdash;know
that it likewise records the history of one of the
most ambitious and importunate souls that ever
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
existed, of a mind full of superstition and cunning:
the history of the Apostle Paul? Nevertheless,
without this singular history, without the tribulations
and passions of such a mind, and of such a
soul, there would have been no Christian kingdom;
we should have scarcely have even heard of a little
Jewish sect, the founder of which died on the Cross.
It is true that, if this history had been understood
in time, if we had read, <emph>really read</emph>, the writings of
St. Paul, not as the revelations of the <q>Holy
Ghost,</q> but with honest and independent minds,
oblivious of all our personal troubles&mdash;there were
no such readers for fifteen centuries&mdash;it would have
been all up with Christianity long ago: so searchingly
do these writings of the Jewish Pascal lay bare
the origins of Christianity, just as the French Pascal
let us see its destiny and how it will ultimately
perish. That the ship of Christianity threw overboard
no inconsiderable part of its Jewish ballast,
that it was able to sail into the waters of the heathen
and actually did do so: this is due to the history
of one single man, this apostle who was so greatly
troubled in mind and so worthy of pity, but who
was also very disagreeable to himself and to others.
</p>

<p>
This man suffered from a fixed idea, or rather
a fixed question, an ever-present and ever-burning
question: what was the <emph>meaning</emph> of the Jewish Law?
and, more especially, <emph>the fulfilment of this Law</emph>?
In his youth he had done his best to satisfy it, thirsting
as he did for that highest distinction which the
Jews could imagine&mdash;this people, which raised the
imagination of moral loftiness to a greater elevation
than any other people, and which alone succeeded
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
in uniting the conception of a holy God with the idea
of sin considered as an offence against this holiness.
St. Paul became at once the fanatic defender and
guard-of-honour of this God and His Law. Ceaselessly
battling against and lying in wait for all
transgressors of this Law and those who presumed
to doubt it, he was pitiless and cruel towards all evil-doers,
whom he would fain have punished in the
most rigorous fashion possible.
</p>

<p>
Now, however, he was aware in his own person
of the fact that such a man as himself&mdash;violent,
sensual, melancholy, and malicious in his hatred&mdash;<emph>could</emph>
not fulfil the Law; and furthermore, what
seemed strangest of all to him, he saw that his
boundless craving for power was continually
provoked to break it, and that he could not help
yielding to this impulse. Was it really <q>the flesh</q>
which made him a trespasser time and again? Was
it not rather, as it afterwards occurred to him,
the Law itself, which continually showed itself
to be impossible to fulfil, and seduced men into
transgression with an irresistible charm? But
at that time he had not thought of this means of
escape. As he suggests here and there, he had
many things on his conscience&mdash;hatred, murder,
sorcery, idolatry, debauchery, drunkenness, and
orgiastic revelry,&mdash;and to however great an extent
he tried to soothe his conscience, and, even more,
his desire for power, by the extreme fanaticism of
his worship for and defence of the Law, there were
times when the thought struck him: <q>It is all in
vain! The anguish of the unfulfilled Law cannot be
overcome.</q> Luther must have experienced similar
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
feelings, when, in his cloister, he endeavoured to
become the ideal man of his imagination; and, as
Luther one day began to hate the ecclesiastical ideal,
and the Pope, and the saints, and the whole clergy,
with a hatred which was all the more deadly as he
could not avow it even to himself, an analogous
feeling took possession of St. Paul. The Law was
the Cross on which he felt himself crucified. How
he hated it! What a grudge he owed it! How he
began to look round on all sides to find a means for
its total annihilation, that he might no longer be
obliged to fulfil it himself! And at last a liberating
thought, together with a vision&mdash;which was only to
be expected in the case of an epileptic like himself&mdash;flashed
into his mind: to him, the stern upholder
of the Law&mdash;who, in his innermost heart, was tired
to death of it&mdash;there appeared on the lonely path
that Christ, with the divine effulgence on His countenance,
and Paul heard the words: <q>Why persecutest
thou Me?</q>
</p>

<p>
What actually took place, then, was this: his
mind was suddenly enlightened, and he said to
himself: <q>It is unreasonable to persecute this
Jesus Christ! Here is my means of escape, here
is my complete vengeance, here and nowhere else
have I the destroyer of the Law in my hands!</q>
The sufferer from anguished pride felt himself
restored to health all at once, his moral despair
disappeared in the air; for morality itself was
blown away, annihilated&mdash;that is to say, <emph>fulfilled</emph>,
there on the Cross! Up to that time that ignominious
death had seemed to him to be the
principal argument against the <q>Messiahship</q>
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
proclaimed by the followers of the new doctrine:
but what if it were necessary for doing away with
the Law? The enormous consequences of this
thought, of this solution of the enigma, danced
before his eyes, and he at once became the happiest
of men. The destiny of the Jews, yea, of all
mankind, seemed to him to be intertwined with this
instantaneous flash of enlightenment: he held the
thought of thoughts, the key of keys, the light of
lights; history would henceforth revolve round him!
For from that time forward he would be the apostle
of the <emph>annihilation of the Law</emph>! To be dead to sin&mdash;that
meant to be dead to the Law also; to be
in the flesh&mdash;that meant to be under the Law!
To be one with Christ&mdash;that meant to have become,
like Him, the destroyer of the Law; to be dead
with Him&mdash;that meant likewise to be dead to the
Law. Even if it were still possible to sin, it would
not at any rate be possible to sin against the Law:
<q>I am above the Law,</q> thinks Paul; adding, <q>If I
were now to acknowledge the Law again and to
submit to it, I should make Christ an accomplice
in the sin</q>; for the Law was there for the purpose
of producing sin and setting it in the foreground,
as an emetic produces sickness. God could not
have decided upon the death of Christ had it been
possible to fulfil the Law without it; henceforth,
not only are all sins expiated, but sin itself is
abolished; henceforth the Law is dead; henceforth
<q>the flesh</q> in which it dwelt is dead&mdash;or at all
events dying, gradually wasting away. To live for
a short time longer amid this decay!&mdash;this is the
Christian's fate, until the time when, having become
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
one with Christ, he arises with Him, sharing with
Christ the divine glory, and becoming, like Christ,
a <q>Son of God.</q> Then Paul's exaltation was at its
height, and with it the importunity of his soul&mdash;the
thought of union with Christ made him lose all
shame, all submission, all constraint, and his ungovernable
ambition was shown to be revelling in
the expectation of divine glories.
</p>

<p>
Such was the first Christian, the inventor of
Christianity! before him there were only a few
Jewish sectaries.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>69.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Inimitable.</hi>&mdash;There is an enormous strain and
distance between envy and friendship, between self-contempt
and pride: the Greek lived in the former,
the Christian in the latter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>70.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Use of a Coarse Intellect.</hi>&mdash;The
Christian Church is an encyclopædia of primitive
cults and views of the most varied origin; and is,
in consequence, well adapted to missionary work:
in former times she could&mdash;and still does&mdash;go
wherever she would, and in doing so always found
something resembling herself, to which she could
assimilate herself and gradually substitute her own
spirit for it. It is not to what is Christian in her
usages, but to what is universally pagan in them,
that we have to attribute the development of this
universal religion. Her thoughts, which have their
origin at once in the Judaic and in the Hellenic
spirit, were able from the very beginning to raise
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
themselves above the exclusiveness and subtleties
of races and nations, as above prejudices. Although
we may admire the power which makes even the
most difficult things coalesce, we must nevertheless
not overlook the contemptible qualities of this power&mdash;the
astonishing coarseness and narrowness of the
Church's intellect when it was in process of formation,
a coarseness which permitted it to accommodate
itself to any diet, and to digest contradictions like
pebbles.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>71.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Christian Vengeance against Rome.</hi>&mdash;Perhaps
nothing is more fatiguing than the sight
of a continual conqueror: for more than two
hundred years the world had seen Rome overcoming
one nation after another, the circle was
closed, all future seemed to be at an end, everything
was done with a view to its lasting for all
time&mdash;yea, when the Empire built anything it was
erected with a view to being <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aere perennius</foreign>. We,
who know only the <q>melancholy of ruins,</q> can
scarcely understand that totally different <emph>melancholy
of eternal buildings</emph>, from which men endeavoured
to save themselves as best they could&mdash;with the
light-hearted fancy of a Horace, for example.
Others sought different consolations for the weariness
which was closely akin to despair, against the
deadening knowledge that from henceforth all
progress of thought and heart would be hopeless,
that the huge spider sat everywhere and mercilessly
continued to drink all the blood within
its reach, no matter where it might spring forth.
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
This mute, century-old hatred of the wearied spectators
against Rome, wherever Rome's domination
extended, was at length vented in Christianity,
which united Rome, <q>the world,</q> and <q>sin</q> into a
single conception. The Christians took their revenge
on Rome by proclaiming the immediate and
sudden destruction of the world; by once more
introducing a future&mdash;for Rome had been able to
transform everything into the history of its <emph>own</emph>
past and present&mdash;a future in which Rome was no
longer the most important factor; and by dreaming
of the last judgment&mdash;while the crucified Jew, as
the symbol of salvation, was the greatest derision
on the superb Roman prætors in the provinces;
for now they seemed to be only the symbols of
ruin and a <q>world</q> ready to perish.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>72.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The <q>Life after Death.</q></hi>&mdash;Christianity
found the idea of punishment in hell in the entire
Roman Empire: for the numerous mystic cults have
hatched this idea with particular satisfaction as
being the most fecund egg of their power. Epicurus
thought he could do nothing better for his followers
than to tear this belief up by the roots: his triumph
found its finest echo in the mouth of one of his
disciples, the Roman Lucretius, a poet of a gloomy,
though afterwards enlightened, temperament.
Alas! his triumph had come too soon: Christianity
took under its special protection this belief
in subterranean horrors, which was already beginning
to die away in the minds of men; and that
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
was clever of it. For, without this audacious leap
into the most complete paganism, how could it
have proved itself victorious over the popularity
of Mithras and Isis? In this way it managed
to bring timorous folk over to its side&mdash;the most
enthusiastic adherents of a new faith! The Jews,
being a people which, like the Greeks, and even in
a greater degree than the Greeks, loved and still
love life, had not cultivated that idea to any great
extent: the thought of final death as the punishment
of the sinner, death without resurrection as an
extreme menace: this was sufficient to impress these
peculiar men, who did not wish to get rid of their
bodies, but hoped, with their refined Egypticism,
to preserve them for ever. (A Jewish martyr,
about whom we may read in the Second Book of
the Maccabees, would not think of giving up his
intestines, which had been torn out: he wanted to
have them at the resurrection: quite a Jewish
characteristic!)
</p>

<p>
Thoughts of eternal damnation were far from the
minds of the early Christians: they thought they
were <emph>delivered</emph> from death, and awaited a transformation
from day to day, but not death. (What
a curious effect the first death must have produced
on these expectant people! How many different
feelings must have been mingled together&mdash;astonishment,
exultation, doubt, shame, and passion!
Verily, a subject worthy of a great artist!) St.
Paul could say nothing better in praise of his
Saviour than that he had opened the gates of immortality
to everybody&mdash;he did not believe in the
resurrection of those who had not been saved: more
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
than this, by reason of his doctrine of the impossibility
of carrying out the Law, and of death considered
as a consequence of sin, he even suspected
that, up to that time, no one had become immortal
(or at all events only a very few, solely owing to
special grace and not to any merits of their own):
it was only in his time that immortality had begun
to open its gates&mdash;and only a few of the elect would
finally gain admittance, as the pride of the elect cannot
help saying.
</p>

<p>
In other places, where the impulse towards life
was not so strong as among the Jews and the
Christian Jews, and where the prospect of immortality
did not appear to be more valuable than
the prospect of a final death, that pagan, yet not
altogether un-Jewish addition of Hell became a very
useful tool in the hands of the missionaries: then
arose the new doctrine that even the sinners and
the unsaved are immortal, the doctrine of eternal
damnation, which was more powerful than the idea
of a <emph>final death</emph>, which thereafter began to fade
away. It was science alone which could overcome
this idea, at the same time brushing aside all other
ideas about death and an after-life. We are poorer
in one particular: the <q>life after death</q> has no
further interest for us! an indescribable blessing,
which is as yet too recent to be considered as such
throughout the world. And Epicurus is once more
triumphant.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>73.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>For the <q>Truth</q>!</hi>&mdash;<q>The truth of Christianity
was attested by the virtuous lives of the
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
Christians, their firmness in suffering, their unshakable
belief and above all by the spread and
increase of the faith in spite of all calamities.</q>&mdash;That's
how you talk even now. The more's the
pity. Learn, then, that all this proves nothing
either in favour of truth or against it; that truth
must be demonstrated differently from conscientiousness,
and that the latter is in no respect whatever
an argument in favour of the former.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>74.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Christian <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Arrière-pensée</foreign>.</hi>&mdash;Would not
this have been a general reservation among
Christians of the first century: <q>It is better to
persuade ourselves into the belief that we are guilty
rather than that we are innocent; for it is impossible
to ascertain the disposition of so powerful a judge&mdash;but
it is to be feared that he is looking out only
for those who are conscious of guilt. Bearing in
mind his great power, it is more likely that he will
pardon a guilty person than admit that any one is
innocent, in his presence.</q> This was the feeling of
poor provincial folk in the presence of the Roman
prætor: <q>He is too proud for us to dare to be innocent.</q>
And may not this very sentiment have made
its influence felt when the Christians endeavoured
to picture to themselves the aspect of the Supreme
Judge?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>75.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Neither European nor Noble.</hi>&mdash;There is
something Oriental and feminine in Christianity, and
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
this is shown in the thought, <q>Whom the Lord
loveth, He chasteneth</q>; for women in the Orient
consider castigations and the strict seclusion of their
persons from the world as a sign of their husband's
love, and complain if these signs of love cease.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>76.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>If you think it Evil, you make it Evil.</hi>&mdash;The
passions become evil and malignant when
regarded with evil and malignant eyes. It is in this
way that Christianity has succeeded in transforming
Eros and Aphrodite&mdash;sublime powers, capable of
idealisation&mdash;into hellish genii and phantom
goblins, by means of the pangs which every sexual
impulse was made to raise in the conscience of the
believers. Is it not a dreadful thing to transform
necessary and regular sensations into a source of
inward misery, and thus arbitrarily to render interior
misery necessary and regular <emph>in the case of every
man</emph>! Furthermore, this misery remains secret
with the result that it is all the more deeply rooted,
for it is not all men who have the courage, which
Shakespeare shows in his sonnets, of making public
their Christian gloom on this point.
</p>

<p>
Must a feeling, then, always be called evil against
which we are forced to struggle, which we must
restrain even within certain limits, or, in given cases,
banish entirely from our minds? Is it not the habit
of vulgar souls always to call an <emph>enemy</emph> evil! and
must we call Eros an enemy? The sexual feelings,
like the feelings of pity and adoration, possess the
particular characteristic that, in their case, one being
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
gratifies another by the pleasure he enjoys&mdash;it is but
rarely that we meet with such a benevolent arrangement
in nature. And yet we calumniate and corrupt
it all by our bad conscience! We connect the procreation
of man with a bad conscience!
</p>

<p>
But the outcome of this diabolisation of Eros is
a mere farce: the <q>demon</q> Eros becomes an object
of greater interest to mankind than all the angels
and saints put together, thanks to the mysterious
Mumbo-Jumboism of the Church in all things
erotic: it is due to the Church that love stories,
even in our own time, have become the one common
interest which appeals to all classes of people&mdash;with
an exaggeration which would be incomprehensible
to antiquity, and which will not fail to
provoke roars of laughter in coming generations.
All our poetising and thinking, from the highest to
the lowest, is marked, and more than marked, by
the exaggerated importance bestowed upon the love
story as the principal item of our existence.
Posterity may perhaps, on this account, come to
the conclusion that its entire legacy of Christian
culture is tainted with narrowness and insanity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>77.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Tortures of the Soul.</hi>&mdash;The whole
world raises a shout of horror at the present day if
one man presumes to torture the body of another:
the indignation against such a being bursts forth
almost spontaneously. Nay; we tremble even at
the very thought of torture being inflicted on a
man or an animal, and we undergo unspeakable
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
misery when we hear of such an act having been
accomplished. But the same feeling is experienced
in a very much lesser degree and extent when it
is a question of the tortures of the soul and the
dreadfulness of their infliction. Christianity has
introduced such tortures on an unprecedented scale,
and still continues to preach this kind of martyrdom&mdash;yea,
it even complains innocently of backsliding
and indifference when it meets with a state
of soul which is free from such agonies. From all
this it now results that humanity, in the face of
spiritual racks, tortures of the mind, and instruments
of punishment, behaves even to-day with the
same awesome patience and indecision which it exhibited
in former times in the presence of the
cruelties practised on the bodies of men or animals.
Hell has certainly not remained merely an empty
sound; and a new kind of pity has been devised
to correspond to the newly-created fears of hell&mdash;a
horrible and ponderous compassion, hitherto unknown;
with people <q>irrevocably condemned to
hell,</q> as, for example, the Stony Guest gave Don
Juan to understand, and which, during the Christian
era, should often have made the very stones weep.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch presents us with a gloomy picture of the
state of mind of a superstitious man in pagan times:
but this picture pales when compared with that of
a Christian of the Middle Ages, who <emph>supposes</emph> that
nothing can save him from <q>torments everlasting.</q>
Dreadful omens appear to him: perhaps he sees a
stork holding a snake in his beak and hesitating to
swallow it. Or all nature suddenly becomes pale;
or bright, fiery colours appear across the surface
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
of the earth. Or the ghosts of his dead relations
approach him, with features showing traces of
dreadful sufferings. Or the dark walls of the room
in which the man is sleeping are suddenly lighted
up, and there, amidst a yellow flame, he perceives
instruments of torture and a motley horde of snakes
and devils. Christianity has surely turned this
world of ours into a fearful habitation by raising
the crucifix in all parts and thereby proclaiming
the earth to be a place <q>where the just man is
tortured to death!</q> And when the ardour of
some great preacher for once disclosed to the public
the secret sufferings of the individual, the agonies
of the lonely souls, when, for example, Whitefield
preached <q>like a dying man to the dying,</q> now
bitterly weeping, now violently stamping his feet,
speaking passionately, in abrupt and incisive tones,
without fearing to turn the whole force of his attack
upon any one individual present, excluding him
from the assembly with excessive harshness&mdash;then
indeed did it seem as if the earth were being transformed
into a <q>field of evil.</q> The huge crowds
were then seen to act as if seized with a sudden
attack of madness: many were in fits of anguish;
others lay unconscious and motionless; others,
again, trembled or rent the air with their piercing
shrieks. Everywhere there was a loud breathing,
as of half-choked people who were gasping for the
breath of life. <q>Indeed,</q> said an eye-witness once,
<q>almost all the noises appeared to come from people
who were dying in the bitterest agony.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let us never forget that it was Christianity which
first turned the death-bed into a bed of agony, and
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
that, by the scenes which took place there, and the
terrifying sounds which were made possible there
for the first time, it has poisoned the senses and the
blood of innumerable witnesses and their children.
Imagine the ordinary man who can never efface
the recollection of words like these: <q>Oh, eternity!
Would that I had no soul! Would that I had
never been born! My soul is damned, damned;
lost for ever! Six days ago you might have
helped me. But now all is over. I belong to the
devil, and with him I will go down to hell. Break,
break, ye poor hearts of stone! Ye will not break?
What more can be done for hearts of stone? I am
damned that ye may be saved! There he is!
Yea; there he is! Come, good devil! Come!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>78.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Avenging Justice.</hi>&mdash;Misfortune and guilt:
these two things have been put on one scale by
Christianity; so that, when the misfortune which
follows a fault is a serious one, this fault is always
judged accordingly to be a very heinous one. But
this was not the valuation of antiquity, and that
is why Greek tragedy&mdash;in which misfortune and
punishment are discussed at length, and yet in
another sense&mdash;forms part of the great liberators
of the mind to an extent which even the ancients
themselves could not realise. They remained ingenuous
enough not to set up an <q>adequate relation</q>
between guilt and misfortune. The guilt of
their tragic heroes is, indeed, the little pebble that
makes them stumble, and on which account they
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
sometimes happen to break an arm or knock out
an eye. Upon this the feeling of antiquity made
the comment, <q>Well, he should have gone his way
with more caution and less pride.</q> It was reserved
for Christianity, however, to say: <q>Here we have
a great misfortune, and behind this great misfortune
there must lie a great fault, an equally <emph>serious fault</emph>,
though we cannot clearly see it! If, wretched man,
you do not feel it, it is because your heart is hardened&mdash;and
worse than this will happen to you!</q>
</p>

<p>
Besides this, antiquity could point to examples
of real misfortunes, misfortunes that were pure
and innocent; it was only with the advent of
Christianity that all punishment became well-merited
punishment: in addition to this it renders
the imagination of the sufferer still more suffering,
so that the victim, in the midst of his distress, is
seized with the feeling that he has been morally
reproved and cast away. Poor humanity! The
Greeks had a special word to stand for the feeling of
indignation which was experienced at the misfortune
of another: among Christian peoples this feeling
was prohibited and was not permitted to develop;
hence the reason why they have no name for this
<emph>more virile</emph> brother of pity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>79.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Proposal.</hi>&mdash;If, according to the arguments
of Pascal and Christianity, our ego is always hateful,
how can we permit and suppose other people,
whether God or men, to love it? It would be
contrary to all good principles to let ourselves be
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
loved when we know very well that we deserve
nothing but hatred&mdash;not to speak of other repugnant
feelings. <q>But this is the very Kingdom of
Grace.</q> Then you look upon your love for your
neighbour as a grace? Your pity as a grace?
Well, then, if you can do all this, there is no reason
why you should not go a step further: love yourselves
through grace, and then you will no longer
find your God necessary, and the entire drama of
the Fall and Redemption of mankind will reach its
last act in yourselves!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>80.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Compassionate Christian.</hi>&mdash;A
Christian's compassion in the presence of his
neighbour's suffering has another side to it: viz.
his profound suspicion of all the joy of his neighbour,
of his neighbour's joy in everything that he
wills and is able to do.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>81.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Saint's Humanity.</hi>&mdash;A saint had fallen
into the company of believers, and could no longer
stand their continually expressed hatred for sin.
At last he said to them: <q>God created all things,
except sin: therefore it is no wonder that He does
not like it. But man has created sin, and why,
then, should he disown this only child of his merely
because it is not regarded with a friendly eye by
God, its grandfather? Is that human? Honour
to whom honour is due&mdash;but one's heart and duty
must speak, above all, in favour of the child&mdash;and
only in the second place for the honour of the
grandfather!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<div>
<head>82.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Theological Attack.</hi>&mdash;<q>You must
arrange that with yourself; for your life is at
stake!</q>&mdash;Luther it is who suddenly springs upon
us with these words and imagines that we feel the
knife at our throats. But we throw him off with
the words of one higher and more considerate than
he: <q>We need form no opinion in regard to this
or that matter, and thus save our souls from trouble.
For, by their very nature, the things themselves
cannot compel us to express an opinion.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>83.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poor Humanity!</hi>&mdash;A single drop of blood too
much or too little in the brain may render our life
unspeakably miserable and difficult, and we may
suffer more from this single drop of blood than
Prometheus from his vulture. But the worst is when
we do not know that this drop is causing our sufferings&mdash;and
we think it is <q>the devil!</q> Or <q>sin!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_84'/>
<head>84.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Philology of Christianity.</hi>&mdash;How
little Christianity cultivates the sense of honesty
can be inferred from the character of the writings
of its learned men. They set out their conjectures
as audaciously as if they were dogmas, and are but
seldom at a disadvantage in regard to the interpretation
of Scripture. Their continual cry is: <q>I
am right, for it is written</q>&mdash;and then follows an
explanation so shameless and capricious that a
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
philologist, when he hears it, must stand stock-still
between anger and laughter, asking himself again
and again: Is it possible? Is it honest? Is it even
decent?
</p>

<p>
It is only those who never&mdash;or always&mdash;attend
church that underestimate the dishonesty with
which this subject is still dealt in Protestant
pulpits; in what a clumsy fashion the preacher
takes advantage of his security from interruption;
how the Bible is pinched and squeezed; and how
the people are made acquainted with every form of
<emph>the art of false reading</emph>.
</p>

<p>
When all is said and done, however, what can
be expected from the effects of a religion which,
during the centuries when it was being firmly
established, enacted that huge philological farce
concerning the Old Testament? I refer to that
attempt to tear the Old Testament from the hands
of the Jews under the pretext that it contained only
Christian doctrines and <emph>belonged</emph> to the Christians
as the true people of Israel, while the Jews had
merely arrogated it to themselves without authority.
This was followed by a mania of would-be interpretation
and falsification, which could not under
any circumstances have been allied with a good
conscience. However strongly Jewish savants protested,
it was everywhere sedulously asserted that
the Old Testament alluded everywhere to Christ,
and nothing but Christ, more especially His Cross,
and thus, wherever reference was made to wood, a
rod, a ladder, a twig, a tree, a willow, or a staff,
such a reference could not but be a prophecy relating
to the wood of the Cross: even the setting-up
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
of the Unicorn and the Brazen Serpent, even
Moses stretching forth his hands in prayer&mdash;yea,
the very spits on which the Easter lambs were
roasted: all these were allusions to the Cross, and,
as it were, preludes to it! Did any one who kept
on asserting these things ever <emph>believe</emph> in them?
Let it not be forgotten that the Church did not
shrink from putting interpolations in the text of the
Septuagint (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Ps. xcvi. 10), in order that she might
later on make use of these interpolated passages
as Christian prophecies. They were engaged in a
struggle, and thought of their foes rather than of
honesty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>85.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Subtlety in Penury.</hi>&mdash;Take care not to laugh
at the mythology of the Greeks merely because it
so little resembles your own profound metaphysics!
You should admire a people who checked their quick
intellect at this point, and for a long time afterwards
had tact enough to avoid the danger of
scholasticism and hair-splitting superstition.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>86.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Christian Interpreters of the Body.</hi>&mdash;Whatever
originates in the stomach, the intestines,
the beating of the heart, the nerves, the bile,
the seed&mdash;all those indispositions, debilities, irritations,
and the whole contingency of that machine
about which we know so little&mdash;a Christian like
Pascal considers it all as a moral and religious
phenomenon, asking himself whether God or the
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
devil, good or evil, salvation or damnation, is the
cause. Alas for the unfortunate interpreter! How
he must distort and worry his system! How he
must distort and worry himself in order to gain
his point!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>87.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Moral Miracle.</hi>&mdash;In the domain of
morality, Christianity knows of nothing but the
miracle; the sudden change in all valuations, the
sudden renouncement of all habits, the sudden and
irresistible predilection for new things and persons.
Christianity looks upon this phenomenon as the
work of God, and calls it the act of regeneration,
thus giving it a unique and incomparable value.
Everything else which is called morality, and which
bears no relation to this miracle, becomes in consequence
a matter of indifference to the Christian,
and indeed, so far as it is a feeling of well-being
and pride, an object of fear. The canon of virtue,
of the fulfilled law, is established in the New
Testament, but in such a way as to be the canon
of <emph>impossible virtue</emph>: men who still aspire to moral
perfections must come to understand, in the face
of this canon, that they are further and further
<emph>removed</emph> from their aim; they must <emph>despair</emph> of
virtue, and end by throwing themselves at the feet
of the Merciful One.
</p>

<p>
It is only in reaching a conclusion like this that
moral efforts on the part of the Christian can still
be regarded as possessing any value: the condition
that these efforts shall always remain sterile, painful,
and melancholy is therefore indispensable; and it
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
is in this way that those efforts could still avail to
bring about that moment of ecstasy when man experiences
the <q>overflow of grace</q> and the moral
miracle. This struggle for morality is, however,
not <emph>necessary</emph>; for it is by no means uncommon for
this miracle to happen to the sinner at the very
moment when he is, so to speak, wallowing in the
mire of sin: yea, the leap from the deepest and
most abandoned sinfulness into its contrary seems
easier, and, as a clear proof of the miracle, even
more desirable.
</p>

<p>
What, for the rest, may be the signification of
such a sudden, unreasonable, and irresistible revolution,
such a change from the depths of misery
into the heights of happiness? (might it be a
disguised epilepsy?) This should at all events
be considered by alienists, who have frequent opportunities
of observing similar <q>miracles</q>&mdash;for
example, the mania of murder or suicide. The
relatively <q>more pleasant consequences</q> in the case
of the Christian make no important difference.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>88.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Luther, the Great Benefactor.</hi>&mdash;Luther's
most important result is the suspicion which he
awakened against the saints and the entire Christian
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign>; only since his day has an un-Christian
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign> again become possible
in Europe, only since then has contempt for laymen
and worldly activity ceased. Luther continued to
be an honest miner's son even after he had been
shut up in a monastery, and there, for lack of other
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
depths and <q>borings,</q> he descended into himself,
and bored terrifying and dark passages through his
own depths&mdash;finally coming to recognise that an
introspective and saintly life was impossible to him,
and that his innate <q>activity</q> in body and soul
would end by being his ruin. For a long time,
too long, indeed, he endeavoured to find the way
to holiness through castigations; but at length he
made up his mind, and said to himself: <q>There is
no real <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign>! We have been deceived.
The saints were no better than the rest of us.</q>
This was truly a rustic way of gaining one's case;
but for the Germans of that period it was the only
proper way. How edified they felt when they could
read in their Lutheran catechism: <q>Apart from the
Ten Commandments there is no work which could
find favour in the eyes of God&mdash;these much-boasted
spiritual works of the saints are purely imaginary!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>89.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Doubt As Sin.</hi>&mdash;Christianity has done all it
possibly could to draw a circle round itself, and has
even gone so far as to declare doubt itself to be
a sin. We are to be precipitated into faith by a
miracle, without the help of reason, after which we
are to float in it as the clearest and least equivocal
of elements&mdash;a mere glance at some solid ground,
the thought that we exist for some purpose other
than floating, the least movement of our amphibious
nature: all this is a sin! Let it be noted that,
following this decision, the proofs and demonstration
of the faith, and all meditations upon its origin,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
are prohibited as sinful. Christianity wants blindness
and frenzy and an eternal swan-song above
the waves under which reason has been drowned!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>90.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Egoism <hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> Egoism.</hi>&mdash;How many are there
who still come to the conclusion: <q>Life would be
intolerable were there no God!</q> Or, as is said in
idealistic circles: <q>Life would be intolerable if its
ethical signification were lacking.</q> Hence there
must be a God&mdash;or an ethical signification of
existence! In reality the case stands thus: He
who is accustomed to conceptions of this sort does
not desire a life without them, hence these conceptions
are necessary for him and his preservation&mdash;but
what a presumption it is to assert that everything
necessary for my preservation must exist
<emph>in reality</emph>! As if my preservation were really
necessary! What if others held the contrary
opinion? if they did not care to live under the
conditions of these two articles of faith, and did not
regard life as worth living if they were realised!&mdash;And
that is the present position of affairs.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>91.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Honesty of God.</hi>&mdash;An omniscient and
omnipotent God who does not even take care that
His intentions shall be understood by His creatures&mdash;could
He be a God of goodness? A God, who,
for thousands of years, has permitted innumerable
doubts and scruples to continue unchecked as if
they were of no importance in the salvation of mankind,
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
and who, nevertheless, announces the most
dreadful consequences for any one who mistakes his
truth? Would he not be a cruel god if, being himself
in possession of the truth, he could calmly contemplate
mankind, in a state of miserable torment,
worrying its mind as to what was truth?
</p>

<p>
Perhaps, however, he really is a God of goodness,
and was unable to express Himself more clearly?
Perhaps he lacked intelligence enough for this?
Or eloquence? All the worse! For in such a
case he may have been deceived himself in regard
to what he calls his <q>truth,</q> and may not be far
from being another <q>poor, deceived devil!</q> Must
he not therefore experience all the torments of hell
at seeing His creatures suffering so much here below&mdash;and
even more, suffering through all eternity&mdash;when
he himself can neither advise nor help them,
except as a deaf and dumb person, who makes all
kinds of equivocal signs when his child or his dog
is threatened with the most fearful danger? A distressed
believer who argues thus might be pardoned
if his pity for the suffering God were greater than
his pity for his <q>neighbours</q>; for they are his
neighbours no longer if that most solitary and
primeval being is also the greatest sufferer and
stands most in need of consolation.
</p>

<p>
Every religion shows some traits of the fact that
it owes its origin to a state of human intellectuality
which was as yet too young and immature: they
all make light of the necessity for speaking the
truth: as yet they know nothing of the <emph>duty of
God</emph>, the duty of being clear and truthful in His
communications with men. No one was more
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
eloquent than Pascal in speaking of the <q>hidden
God</q> and the reasons why He had to keep Himself
hidden, all of which indicates clearly enough that
Pascal himself could never make his mind easy on
this point: but he speaks with such confidence that
one is led to imagine that he must have been let
into the secret at some time or other. He seemed
to have some idea that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deus absconditus</foreign> bore
a few slight traces of immorality; and he felt too
much ashamed and afraid of acknowledging this
to himself: consequently, like a man who is afraid,
he spoke as loudly as he could.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>92.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>At the Death-bed of Christianity.</hi>&mdash;All
truly active men now do without inward Christianity,
and the most moderate and thoughtful men of
the intellectual middle classes possess only a kind
of modified Christianity; that is, a peculiarly simplified
Christianity. A God who, in his love, ordains
everything so that it may be best for us, a God who
gives us our virtue and our happiness and then
takes them away from us, so that everything at
length goes on smoothly and there is no reason
left why we should take life ill or grumble about it:
in short, resignation and modesty raised to the rank
of divinities&mdash;that is the best and most lifelike
remnant of Christianity now left to us. It must
be remembered, however, that in this way Christianity
has developed into a soft <emph>moralism</emph>: instead
of <q>God, freedom, and immortality,</q> we have now
a kind of benevolence and honest sentiments, and
the belief that, in the entire universe, benevolence
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
and honest sentiments will finally prevail: this is
the euthanasia of Christianity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>93.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What is Truth?</hi>&mdash;Who will not be pleased
with the conclusions which the faithful take such
delight in coming to?&mdash;<q>Science cannot be true;
for it denies God. Hence it does not come from
God; and consequently it cannot be true&mdash;for God
is truth.</q> It is not the deduction but the premise
which is fallacious. What if God were not exactly
truth, and if this were proved? And if he were
instead the vanity, the desire for power, the ambitions,
the fear, and the enraptured and terrified
folly of mankind?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>94.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Remedy for the Displeased.</hi>&mdash;Even Paul
already believed that some sacrifice was necessary
to take away the deep displeasure which God
experienced concerning sin: and ever since then
Christians have never ceased to vent the ill-humour
which they felt with themselves upon some victim
or another&mdash;whether it was <q>the world,</q> or
<q>history,</q> or <q>reason,</q> or joy, or the tranquillity
of other men&mdash;something good, no matter what,
had to die for <emph>their</emph> sins (even if only <foreign rend='italic'>in effigie</foreign>)!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>95.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Historical Refutation as the Decisive
One.</hi>&mdash;Formerly it was sought to prove
that there was no God&mdash;now it is shown how the
belief that a God existed could have <emph>originated</emph>,
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
and by what means this belief gained authority
and importance: in this way the counterproof that
there is no God becomes unnecessary and superfluous.&mdash;In
former times, when the <q>evidences of
the existence of God</q> which had been brought
forward were refuted, a doubt still remained, viz.
whether better proofs could not be found than those
which had just been refuted: at that time the atheists
did not understand the art of making a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tabula
rasa</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>96.</head>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>In hoc signo vinces.</hi></q>&mdash;To whatever degree
of progress Europe may have attained in other
respects, where religious affairs are concerned it
has not yet reached the liberal naïveté of the
ancient Brahmins, which proves that, in India, four
thousand years ago, people meditated more profoundly
and transmitted to their descendants more
pleasure in meditating than is the case in our own
days. For those Brahmins believed in the first
place that the priests were more powerful than the
gods, and in the second place that it was observances
which constituted the power of the priests:
as a result of which their poets were never tired of
glorifying those observances (prayers, ceremonies,
sacrifices, chants, improvised melodies) as the real
dispensers of all benefits. Although a certain
amount of superstition and poetry was mingled
with all this, the principles were <emph>true</emph>! A step
further, and the gods were cast aside&mdash;which
Europe likewise will have to do before very long!
One more step further, and priests and intermediaries
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
could also be dispensed with&mdash;and then
Buddha, the teacher of the religion of self-redemption,
appeared. How far Europe is still removed
from this degree of culture! When at length all
the customs and observances, upon which rests the
power of gods, priests, and saviours, shall have been
destroyed, when as a consequence morality, in the
old sense, will be dead, then there will come ...
yea, what will come then? But let us refrain from
speculating; let us rather make certain that Europe
will retrieve that which, in India, amidst this people
of thinkers, was carried out thousands of years ago
as a commandment of thought!
</p>

<p>
Scattered among the different nations of Europe
there are now from ten to twenty millions of men
who no longer <q>believe in God</q>&mdash;is it too much
to ask that they should give each other some
indication or password? As soon as they recognise
each other in this way, they will also make
themselves known to each other; and they will
immediately become a power in Europe, and,
happily, a power <emph>among</emph> the nations! among the
classes! between rich and poor! between those
who command, and those who obey! between the
most restless and the most tranquil, tranquillising
people!
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book II.</head>

<div>
<head>97.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>One becomes Moral</hi>&mdash;but not because one is
moral! Submission to morals may be due to
slavishness or vanity, egoism or resignation, dismal
fanaticism or thoughtlessness. It may, again,
be an act of despair, such as submission to the
authority of a ruler; but there is nothing moral
about it <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>98.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Alterations in Morals.</hi>&mdash;Morals are constantly
undergoing changes and transformations,
occasioned by successful crimes. (To these, for example,
belong all innovations in moral judgments.)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>99.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wherein we are all Irrational.</hi>&mdash;We still
continue to draw conclusions from judgments which
we consider as false, or doctrines in which we no
longer believe,&mdash;through our feelings.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>100.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Awaking from a Dream.</hi>&mdash;Noble and wise
men once upon a time believed in the music of the
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
spheres; there are still noble and wise men who
believe in <q>the moral significance of existence,</q> but
there will come a day when this music of the spheres
also will no longer be audible to them. They will
awake and perceive that their ears have been dreaming.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>101.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Open to Doubt.</hi>&mdash;To accept a belief simply because
it is customary implies that one is dishonest,
cowardly, and lazy.&mdash;Must dishonesty, cowardice,
and laziness, therefore, be the primary conditions
of morality?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>102.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The most Ancient Moral Judgments.</hi>&mdash;What
attitude do we assume towards the acts of
our neighbour?&mdash;In the first place, we consider how
they may benefit ourselves&mdash;we see them only in
this light. It is this effect which we regard as the
intention of the acts,&mdash;and in the end we come
to look upon these intentions of our neighbour
as permanent qualities in him, and we call him,
for example, <q>a dangerous man.</q> Triple error!
Triple and most ancient mistake! Perhaps this
inheritance comes to us from the animals and their
faculty of judgment! Must not the origin of all
morality be sought in these detestable narrow-minded
conclusions: <q>Whatever injures me is evil
(something injurious in itself), whatever benefits me
is good (beneficial and profitable in itself), whatever
injures me once or several times is hostile <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
se</foreign>; whatever benefits me once or several times is
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
friendly <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>.</q> <foreign rend='italic'>O pudenda origo!</foreign> Is not this
equivalent to interpreting the contemptible, occasional,
and often merely accidental relations of another
person to us as his primary and most essential
qualities, and affirming that towards himself and
every one else he is only capable of such actions as
we ourselves have experienced at his hands once or
several times! And is not this thorough folly based
upon the most immodest of all mental reservations:
namely, that we ourselves must be the standard of
what is good, since we determine good and evil?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_103'/>
<head>103.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>There are Two Classes of People who
deny Morality.</hi>&mdash;To deny morality may mean,
in the first place, to deny the moral inducements
which, men pretend, have urged them on to their
actions,&mdash;which is equivalent to saying that
morality merely consists of words and forms, part of
that coarse and subtle deceit (especially self-deceit)
which is characteristic of mankind, and perhaps
more especially of those men who are celebrated for
their virtues. In the second place, it may mean our
denying that moral judgments are founded on
truths. It is admitted in such a case that these
judgments are, in fact, the motives of the actions,
but that in this way it is really errors as the basis
of all moral judgments which urge men on to their
moral actions. This is my point of view; but I
should be far from denying that in very many cases
a subtle suspicion in accordance with the former
point of view&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in the spirit of La Rochefoucauld&mdash;is
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
also justifiable, and in any case of a high general
utility.&mdash;Therefore I deny morality in the same
way as I deny alchemy, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> I deny its hypotheses;
but I do not deny that there have been alchemists
who believed in these hypotheses and based their
actions upon them. I also deny immorality&mdash;not
that innumerable people feel immoral, but that
there is any true reason why they should feel so.
I should not, of course, deny&mdash;unless I were a fool&mdash;that
many actions which are called immoral
should be avoided and resisted; and in the same
way that many which are called moral should be
performed and encouraged; but I hold that in both
cases these actions should be performed from
motives other than those which have prevailed up
to the present time. We must learn anew in order
that at last, perhaps very late in the day, we may be
able to do something more: feel anew.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>104.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Valuations.</hi>&mdash;All actions may be referred
back to valuations, and all valuations are
either one's own or adopted, the latter being by far
the more numerous. Why do we adopt them?
Through fear, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> we think it more advisable to
pretend that they are our own, and so well do we
accustom ourselves to do so that it at last becomes
second nature to us. A valuation of our own,
which is the appreciation of a thing in accordance
with the pleasure or displeasure it causes us and
no one else, is something very rare indeed!&mdash;But
must not our valuation of our neighbour&mdash;which
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
is prompted by the motive that we adopt his valuation
in most cases&mdash;proceed from ourselves and by
our own decision? Of course, but then we come to
these decisions during our childhood, and seldom
change them. We often remain during our whole
lifetime the dupes of our childish and accustomed
judgments in our manner of judging our fellow-men
(their minds, rank, morality, character, and
reprehensibility), and we find it necessary to subscribe
to their valuations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>105.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pseudo-egoism.</hi>&mdash;The great majority of
people, whatever they may think and say about
their <q>egoism,</q> do nothing for their ego all their
life long, but only for a phantom of this ego which
has been formed in regard to them by their friends
and communicated to them. As a consequence,
they all live in a haze of impersonal and half-personal
opinions and of arbitrary and, as it were,
poetic valuations: the one always in the head of
another, and this head, again, in the head of somebody
else&mdash;a queer world of phantoms which
manages to give itself a rational appearance! This
haze of opinions and habits grows in extent and
lives almost independently of the people it surrounds;
it is it which gives rise to the immense
effect of general judgments on <q>man</q>&mdash;all those
men, who do not know themselves, believe in a
bloodless abstraction which they call <q>man,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
in a fiction; and every change caused in this abstraction
by the judgments of powerful individualities
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
(such as princes and philosophers) produces
an extraordinary and irrational effect on the great
majority,&mdash;for the simple reason that not a single
individual in this haze can oppose a real ego,
an ego which is accessible to and fathomed by
himself, to the universal pale fiction, which he
could thereby destroy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>106.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against Definitions of Moral Aims.</hi>&mdash;On
all sides we now hear the aim of morals defined as
the preservation and advancement of humanity; but
this is merely the expression of a wish to have a
formula and nothing more. Preservation wherein?
advancement whither? These are questions which
must at once be asked. Is not the most essential
point, the answer to this <emph>wherein?</emph> and <emph>whither?</emph>
left out of the formula? What results therefrom,
so far as our own actions and duties are concerned,
which is not already tacitly and instinctively understood?
Can we sufficiently understand from this
formula whether we must prolong as far as possible
the existence of the human race, or bring about the
greatest possible disanimalisation of man? How
different the means, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the practical morals, would
have to be in the two cases! Supposing that the
greatest possible rationality were given to mankind,
this certainly would not guarantee the longest
possible existence for them! Or supposing that
their <q>greatest happiness</q> was thought to be the
answer to the questions put, do we thereby mean
the highest degree of happiness which a few individuals
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
might attain, or an incalculable, though
finally attainable, average state of happiness for
all? And why should morality be the way to it?
Has not morality, considered as a whole, opened up
so many sources of displeasure as to lead us to
think that man up to the present, with every new
refinement of morality, has become more and more
discontented with himself, with his neighbour, and
with his own lot? Has not the most moral of men
hitherto believed that the only justifiable state of
mankind in the face of morals is that of the deepest
misery?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>107.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Right to our Folly.</hi>&mdash;How must we
act? Why must we act? So far as the coarse and
immediate needs of the individual are concerned,
it is easy to answer these questions, but the more
we enter upon the more important and more subtle
domains of action, the more does the problem become
uncertain and the more arbitrary its solution. An
arbitrary decision, however, is the very thing that
must be excluded here,&mdash;thus commands the authority
of morals: an obscure uneasiness and awe
must relentlessly guide man in those very actions
the objects and means of which he cannot at once
perceive. This authority of morals undermines our
thinking faculty in regard to those things concerning
which it might be dangerous to think wrongly,&mdash;it
is in this way, at all events, that morality usually
justifies itself to its accusers. Wrong in this place
means dangerous; but dangerous to whom? It
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
is not, as a rule, the danger of the doer of the action
which the supporters of authoritative morals have
in view, but their own danger; the loss which their
power and influence might undergo if the right to
act according to their own greater or lesser reason,
however wilfully and foolishly, were accorded to all
men. They on their part make unhesitating use
of their right to arbitrariness and folly,&mdash;they even
command in cases where it is hardly possible, or at
all events very difficult, to answer the questions,
<q>How must they act, why must they act?</q> And
if the reason of mankind grows with such extraordinary
slowness that it was often possible to deny
its growth during the whole course of humanity,
what is more to blame for this than this solemn
presence, even omnipresence, of moral commands,
which do not even permit the individual question
of how and why to be asked at all? Have we not
been educated precisely in such a way as to make
us feel pathetic, and thus to obscure our vision at
the very time when our reason should be able to
see as clearly and calmly as possible&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in all
higher and more important circumstances?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>108.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Some Theses.</hi>&mdash;We should not give the individual,
in so far as he desires his own happiness,
any precepts or recommendations as to the road
leading to happiness; for individual happiness arises
from particular laws that are unknown to anybody,
and such a man will only be hindered or obstructed
by recommendations which come to him from outside
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
sources. Those precepts which are called moral
are in reality directed against individuals, and do
not by any means make for the happiness of such individuals.
The relationship of these precepts to the
"happiness and well-being of mankind" is equally
slight, for it is quite impossible to assign a definite
conception to these words, and still less can they
be employed as guiding stars on the dark sea of
moral aspirations. It is a prejudice to think that
morality is more favourable to the development of
the reason than immorality. It is erroneous to
suppose that the unconscious aim in the development
of every conscious being (namely, animal,
man, humanity, etc.) is its <q>greatest happiness</q>:
on the contrary, there is a particular and incomparable
happiness to be attained at every stage of
our development, one that is neither high nor low,
but quite an individual happiness. Evolution does
not make happiness its goal; it aims merely at
evolution, and nothing else. It is only if humanity
had a universally recognised goal that we could
propose to do this or that: for the time being there
is no such goal. It follows that the pretensions
of morality should not be brought into any relationship
with mankind: this would be merely childish
and irrational. It is quite another thing to recommend
a goal to mankind: this goal would then be
something that would depend upon our own will
and pleasure. Provided that mankind in general
agreed to adopt such a goal, it could then impose
a moral law upon itself, a law which would, at all
events, be imposed by their own free will. Up to
now, however, the moral law has had to be placed
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
above our own free will: strictly speaking, men
did not wish to impose this law upon themselves;
they wished to take it from somewhere, to discover
it, or to let themselves be commanded by it from
somewhere.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>109.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Self-control and Moderation, and their
Final Motive.</hi>&mdash;I find not more than six essentially
different methods for combating the vehemence
of an impulse. First of all, we may avoid the
occasion for satisfying the impulse, weakening and
mortifying it by refraining from satisfying it for
long and ever-lengthening periods. Secondly, we
may impose a severe and regular order upon ourselves
in regard to the satisfying of our appetites.
By thus regulating the impulse and limiting its ebb
and flow to fixed periods, we may obtain intervals
in which it ceases to disturb us; and by beginning
in this way we may perhaps be able to pass on to
the first method. In the third place, we may deliberately
give ourselves over to an unrestrained and
unbounded gratification of the impulse in order that
we may become disgusted with it, and to obtain by
means of this very disgust a command over the impulse:
provided, of course, that we do not imitate the
rider who rides his horse to death and breaks his
own neck in doing so. For this, unhappily, is generally
the outcome of the application of this third
method.
</p>

<p>
In the fourth place, there is an intellectual trick,
which consists in associating the idea of the gratification
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
so firmly with some painful thought, that after a
little practice the thought of gratification is itself immediately
felt as a very painful one. (For example,
when the Christian accustoms himself to think of
the presence and scorn of the devil in the course of
sensual enjoyment, or everlasting punishment in
hell for revenge by murder; or even merely of the
contempt which he will meet with from those of
his fellow-men whom he most respects, if he steals
a sum of money, or if a man has often checked an
intense desire for suicide by thinking of the grief
and self-reproaches of his relations and friends, and
has thus succeeded in balancing himself upon the
edge of life: for, after some practice, these ideas
follow one another in his mind like cause and effect.)
Among instances of this kind may be mentioned
the cases of Lord Byron and Napoleon, in whom
the pride of man revolted and took offence at the
preponderance of one particular passion over the
collective attitude and order of reason. From this
arises the habit and joy of tyrannising over the
craving and making it, as it were, gnash its teeth.
<q>I will not be a slave of any appetite,</q> wrote Byron
in his diary. In the fifth place, we may bring about
a dislocation of our powers by imposing upon ourselves
a particularly difficult and fatiguing task, or
by deliberately submitting to some new charm and
pleasure in order thus to turn our thoughts and
physical powers into other channels. It comes to
the same thing if we temporarily favour another impulse
by affording it numerous opportunities of
gratification, and thus rendering it the squanderer
of the power which would otherwise be commandeered,
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
so to speak, by the tyrannical impulse. A
few, perhaps, will be able to restrain the particular
passion which aspires to domination by granting
their other known passions a temporary encouragement
and license in order that they may devour
the food which the tyrant wishes for himself
alone.
</p>

<p>
In the sixth and last place, the man who can
stand it, and thinks it reasonable to weaken and subdue
his entire physical and psychical organisation,
likewise, of course, attains the goal of weakening a
single violent instinct; as, for example, those who
starve their sensuality and at the same time their
vigour, and often destroy their reason into the bargain,
such as the ascetics.&mdash;Hence, shunning the
opportunities, regulating the impulse, bringing
about satiety and disgust in the impulse, associating
a painful idea (such as that of discredit, disgust, or
offended pride), then the dislocation of one's forces,
and finally general debility and exhaustion: these
are the six methods. But the will to combat the
violence of a craving is beyond our power, equally
with the method we adopt and the success we may
have in applying it. In all this process our intellect
is rather merely the blind instrument of another rival
craving, whether it be the impulse to repose, or the
fear of disgrace and other evil consequences, or love.
While <q>we</q> thus imagine that we are complaining
of the violence of an impulse, it is at bottom merely
one impulse which is complaining of another, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
perception of the violent suffering which is being
caused us presupposes that there is another equally
or more violent impulse, and that a struggle
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
is impending in which our intellect must take
part.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>110.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>That which Opposes.</hi>&mdash;We may observe the
following process in ourselves, and I should like
it to be often observed and confirmed. There arises
in us the scent of a kind of pleasure hitherto unknown
to us, and consequently a new craving.
Now, the question is, What opposes itself to this
craving? If it be things and considerations of a
common kind, or people whom we hold in no very
high esteem, the aim of the new craving assumes
the appearance of a <q>noble, good, praiseworthy
feeling, and one worthy of sacrifice</q>: all the moral
dispositions which have been inherited will adopt
it and will add it to the number of those aims which
we consider as moral&mdash;and now we imagine that
we are no longer striving after a pleasure, but after
a morality, which greatly increases our confidence
in our aspirations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>111.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To the Admirers of Objectiveness.</hi>&mdash;He
who, as a child, has observed in his parents and
acquaintances in the midst of whom he has grown
up, certain varied and strong feelings, with but
little subtle discernment and inclination for intellectual
justice, and has therefore employed his best
powers and his most precious time in imitating these
feelings, will observe in himself when he arrives
at years of discretion that every new thing or man
he meets with excites in him either sympathy or
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
aversion, envy or contempt. Under the domination
of this experience, which he is powerless to
shake off, he admires neutrality of feeling or
<q>objectivity</q> as an extraordinary thing, as something
connected with genius or a very rare morality,
and he cannot believe that even this neutrality is
merely the product of education and habit.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>112.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On the Natural History of Duty and
Right.</hi>&mdash;Our duties are the claims which others
have upon us. How did they acquire these claims?
By the fact that they considered us as capable of
making and holding agreements and contracts, by
assuming that we were their like and equals, and
by consequently entrusting something to us, bringing
us up, educating us, and supporting us. We
do our duty, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> we justify that conception of our
power for the sake of which all these things were
done for us. We return them in proportion as
they were meted out to us. It is thus our pride
that orders us to do our duty&mdash;we desire to re-establish
our own independence by opposing to that
which others have done for us something that we
do for them, for in that way the others invade our
sphere of power, and would for ever have a hand
in it if we did not make reprisals by means of
<q>duty,</q> and thus encroach upon their power. The
rights of others can only have regard to that which
lies within our power; it would be unreasonable
on their part to require something from us which
does not belong to us. To put the matter more
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
accurately, their rights can only relate to what they
imagine to be in our power, provided that it is
something that we ourselves consider as being in
our power. The same error may easily occur on
either side. The feeling of duty depends upon
our having the same belief in regard to the extent
of our power as other people have, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> that we can
promise certain things and undertake to do them
freely (<q>free will</q>).
</p>

<p>
My rights consist of that part of my power which
others have not only conceded to me, but which
they wish to maintain for me. Why do they do
it? On the one hand they are actuated by wisdom,
fear and prudence: whether they expect something
similar from us (the protection of their rights),
whether they consider a struggle with us as dangerous
or inopportune, or whether they see a disadvantage
to themselves in every diminution of our
power, since in that case we should be ill adapted
for an alliance with them against a hostile third
power. On the other hand rights are granted by
donations and cessions. In this latter case, the
other people have not only enough power, but more
than enough, so that they can give up a portion and
guarantee it to the person to whom they give it:
whereby they presuppose a certain restricted sense
of power in the person upon whom they have bestowed
the gift. In this way rights arise: recognised
and guaranteed degrees of power. When
the relations of powers to one another are materially
changed, rights disappear and new ones are formed,
as is demonstrated by the constant flux and reflux
of the rights of nations. When our power diminishes
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
to any great extent, the feelings of those who
hitherto guaranteed it undergo some change: they
consider whether they shall once again restore us to
our former possession, and if they do not see their
way to do this they deny our <q>rights</q> from that
time forward. In the same way, if our power increases
to a considerable extent the feelings of those
who previously recognised it, and whose recognition
we no longer require, likewise change: they will
then try to reduce our power to its former dimensions,
and they will endeavour to interfere in our
affairs, justifying their interference by an appeal to
their <q>duty.</q> But this is merely useless word-quibbling.
Where right prevails, a certain state and
degree of power is maintained, and all attempts at
its augmentation and diminution are resisted. The
right of others is the concession of our feeling of
power to the feeling of power in these others.
Whenever our power shows itself to be thoroughly
shattered and broken, our rights cease: on the
other hand, when we have become very much
stronger, the rights of others cease in our minds to be
what we have hitherto admitted them to be. The
man who aims at being just, therefore, must keep a
constant lookout for the changes in the indicator of
the scales in order that he may properly estimate the
degrees of power and right which, with the customary
transitoriness of human things, retain their
equilibrium for only a short time and in most cases
continue to rise and fall. As a consequence it is
thus very difficult to be <q>just,</q> and requires much
experience, good intentions, and an unusually large
amount of good sense.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div>
<head>113.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Striving for Distinction.</hi>&mdash;When we strive
after distinction we must ceaselessly keep our eyes
fixed on our neighbour and endeavour to ascertain
what his feelings are; but the sympathy and
knowledge which are necessary to satisfy this desire
are far from being inspired by harmlessness, compassion,
or kindness. On the contrary, we wish
to perceive or find out in what way our neighbour
suffers from us, either internally or externally, how
he loses control over himself and yields to the
impression which our hand or even our mere
appearance makes on him. Even when he who
aspires to distinction makes or wishes to make a
joyful, elevating, or cheerful impression, he does
not enjoy this success in that he rejoices, exalts,
or cheers his neighbour, but in that he leaves his
impress on the latter's soul, changing its form and
dominating it according to his will. The desire for
distinction is the desire to subject one's neighbour,
even if it be merely in an indirect fashion, one only
felt or even only dreamt of. There is a long series
of stages in this secretly-desired will to subdue, and
a very complete record of them would perhaps
almost be like an excellent history of culture from
the early distortions of barbarism down to the
caricatures of modern over-refinement and sickly
idealism.
</p>

<p>
This desire for distinction entails upon our
neighbour&mdash;to indicate only a few rungs of the
long ladder&mdash;torture first of all, followed by blows,
then terror, anxious surprise, wonder, envy, admiration,
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
elevation, pleasure, joy, laughter, derision,
mockery, sneers, scourging and self-inflicted torture.
There at the very top of the ladder stands the
ascetic and martyr, who himself experiences the
utmost satisfaction, because he inflicts on himself,
as a result of his desire for distinction, that pain
which his opposite, the barbarian on the first rung
of the ladder, inflicts upon those others, upon whom
and before whom he wishes to distinguish himself.
The triumph of the ascetic over himself, his introspective
glance, which beholds a man split up into
a sufferer and a spectator, and which henceforth
never looks at the outside world but to gather from
it, as it were, wood for his own funeral pyre: this
final tragedy of the desire for distinction which
shows us only one person who, so to speak, is consumed
internally&mdash;that is an end worthy of the
beginning: in both cases there is an inexpressible
happiness at the sight of torture; indeed, happiness
considered as a feeling of power developed to the
utmost, has perhaps never reached a higher pitch
of perfection on earth than in the souls of superstitious
ascetics. This is expressed by the
Brahmins in the story of King Visvamitra, who
obtained so much strength by thousands of years
of penance that he undertook to construct a new
heaven. I believe that in the entire category of
inward experiences the people of our time are mere
novices and clumsy guessers who <q>try to have a shot
at it</q>: four thousand years ago much more was
known about these execrable refinements of self-enjoyment.
Perhaps at that time the creation of
the world was imagined by some Hindu dreamer
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
to have been an ascetic operation which a god took
upon himself! Perhaps this god may have wished
to join himself to a mobile nature as an instrument
of torture in order thus to feel his happiness and
power doubled! And even supposing him to have
been a god of love: what a delight it would have
been for him to create a suffering mankind in order
that he himself might suffer divinely and super-humanly
from the sight of the continual torture of
his creatures, and thus to tyrannise over himself!
And, again, supposing him to have been not only
a god of love, but also a god of holiness, we can
scarcely conceive the ecstasies of this divine ascetic
while creating sins and sinners and eternal punishment,
and an immense place of eternal torture
below his throne where there is a continual weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth!
</p>

<p>
It is not by any means impossible that the soul
of a St. Paul, a Dante, or a Calvin, and people like
them, may once have penetrated into the terrifying
secrets of such voluptuousness of power, and in
view of such souls we may well ask whether the
circle of this desire for distinction has come to a
close with the ascetic. Might it not be possible
for the course of this circle to be traversed a second
time, by uniting the fundamental idea of the ascetic,
and at the same time that of a compassionate
Deity? In other words, pain would be given to
others in order that pain might be given to one's
self, so that in this way one could triumph over
one's self and one's pity to enjoy the extreme
voluptuousness of power.&mdash;Forgive me these
digressions, which come to my mind when I think
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
of all the possibilities in the vast domain of
psychical debaucheries to which one may be led
by the desire for power!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>114.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On the Knowledge of the Sufferer.</hi>&mdash;The
state of sick men who have suffered long and
terribly from the torture inflicted upon them by
their illness, and whose reason has nevertheless not
been in any way affected, is not without a certain
amount of value in our search for knowledge&mdash;quite
apart from the intellectual benefits which
follow upon every profound solitude and every
sudden and justified liberation from duties and
habits. The man who suffers severely looks forth
with terrible calmness from his state of suffering
upon outside things: all those little lying enchantments,
by which things are usually surrounded when
seen through the eye of a healthy person, have
vanished from the sufferer; his own life even lies
there before him, stripped of all bloom and colour.
If by chance it has happened that up to then he
has lived in some kind of dangerous fantasy, this
extreme disenchantment through pain is the means,
and possibly the only means, of extricating him
from it. (It is possible that this is what happened
to the Founder of Christianity when suspended
from the Cross; for the bitterest words ever pronounced,
<q>My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken
Me?</q> if understood in their deepest sense,
as they ought to be understood, contain the
evidence of a complete disillusionment and enlightenment
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
in regard to the deceptions of life: in
that moment of supreme suffering Christ obtained
a clear insight into Himself, just as in the poet's
narrative did the poor dying Don Quixote.)
</p>

<p>
The formidable tension of the intellect that
wishes to hold its own against pain shows everything
that one now looks upon in a new light, and
the inexpressible charm of this new light is often
powerful enough to withstand all the seductiveness
of suicide and to make the continuation of life seem
very desirable to the sufferer. His mind scornfully
turns to the warm and comfortable dream-world
in which the healthy man moves about thoughtlessly,
and he thinks with contempt of the noblest
and most cherished illusions in which he formerly
indulged. He experiences delight in conjuring up
this contempt as if from the depths of hell, and
thus inflicting the bitterest sufferings upon his soul:
it is by this counterpoise that he bears up against
physical suffering&mdash;he feels that such a counterpoise
is now essential! In one terrible moment
of clear-sightedness he says to himself, <q>Be for
once thine own accuser and hangman; for once
regard thy suffering as a punishment which thou
hast inflicted on thyself! Enjoy thy superiority
as a judge: better still, enjoy thine own will and
pleasure, thy tyrannical arbitrariness! Raise thyself
above thy life as above thy suffering, and look
down into the depth of reason and unreason!</q>
</p>

<p>
Our pride revolts as it never did before, it experiences
an incomparable charm in defending life
against such a tyrant as suffering and against all
the insinuations of this tyrant, who would fain urge
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
us to give evidence against life,&mdash;we are taking the
part of life in the face of this tyrant. In this state
of mind we take up a bitter stand against all
pessimism in order that it may not appear to be a
consequence of our condition, and thus humiliate
us as conquered ones. The charm of being just
in our judgments was also never greater than now;
for now this justice is a triumph over ourselves and
over so irritated a state of mind that unfairness of
judgment might be excused,&mdash;but we will not be
excused, it is now, if ever, that we wish to show that
we need no excuse. We pass through downright
orgies of pride.
</p>

<p>
And now appears the first ray of relief, of recovery,
and one of its first effects is that we turn
against the preponderance of our pride: we call
ourselves foolish and vain, as if we had undergone
some unique experience. We humiliate ungratefully
this all-powerful pride, the aid of which enabled
us to endure the pain we suffered, and we
call vehemently for some antidote for this pride:
we wish to become strangers to ourselves and to
be freed from our own person after pain has forcibly
made us personal too long. <q>Away with this
pride,</q> we cry, <q>it was only another illness and
convulsion!</q> Once more we look longingly at
men and nature and recollect with a sorrowful smile
that now since the veil has fallen we regard many
things concerning them in a new and different
light,&mdash;but we are refreshed by once more seeing
the softened lights of life, and emerge from
that fearfully dispassionate daylight in which we
as sufferers saw things and through things. We
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
do not get angry when we see the charms of
health resume their play, and we contemplate the
sight as if transformed, gently and still fatigued.
In this state we cannot listen to music without
weeping.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>115.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The so-called <q>Ego.</q></hi>&mdash;Language and the
prejudices upon which language is based very often
act as obstacles in our paths when we proceed to
explore internal phenomena and impulses: as one
example, we may instance the fact that there are
only words to express the superlative degrees of
these phenomena and impulses. Now, it is our
habit no longer to observe accurately when words
fail us, since it is difficult in such cases to think
with precision: in former times, even, people involuntarily
came to the conclusion that where the
domain of words ceased, the domain of existence
ceased also. Wrath, hatred, love, pity, desire,
recognition, joy, pain: all these are names indicating
extreme conditions; the milder and middle
stages, and even more particularly the ever active
lower stages, escape our attention, and yet it is they
which weave the warp and woof of our character
and destiny. It often happens that these extreme
outbursts&mdash;and even the most moderate pleasure
or displeasure of which we are actually conscious,
whether in partaking of food or listening to a sound,
is possibly, if properly estimated, merely an extreme
outburst,&mdash;destroy the texture and are then violent
exceptions, in most cases the consequences of some
congestions,&mdash;and how easily as such can they
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
mislead the observer! as indeed they mislead the
person acting! We are all of us not what we
appear to be according to the conditions for which
alone we have consciousness and words, and consequently
praise and blame. We fail to recognise
ourselves after these coarse outbursts which are
known to ourselves alone, we draw conclusions from
data where the exceptions prove stronger than the
rules; we misinterpret ourselves in reading our own
ego's pronouncements, which appeared to be so
clear. But our opinion of ourselves, this so-called
ego which we have arrived at by this wrong method,
contributes henceforth to form our character and
destiny.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>116.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Unknown World of the <q>Subject.</q></hi>&mdash;What
men have found it so difficult to understand
from the most ancient times down to the
present day is their ignorance in regard to themselves,
not merely with respect to good and evil,
but something even more essential. The oldest of
illusions lives on, namely, that we know, and know
precisely in each case, how human action is originated.
Not only <q>God who looks into the heart,</q>
not only the man who acts and reflects upon his
action, but everybody does not doubt that he understands
the phenomena of action in every one else.
<q>I know what I want and what I have done, I am
free and responsible for my act, and I make others
responsible for their acts; I can mention by its
name every moral possibility and every internal
movement which precedes an act,&mdash;ye may act as
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
ye will, I understand myself and I understand
you all!</q> Such was what every one thought once
upon a time, and almost every one thinks so even
now. Socrates and Plato, who in this matter were
great sceptics and admirable innovators, were nevertheless
intensely credulous in regard to that fatal
prejudice, that profound error, which holds that
<q>The right knowledge must necessarily be followed
by the right action.</q> In holding this principle they
were still the heirs of the universal folly and presumption
that knowledge exists concerning the
essence of an action.
</p>

<p>
<q>It would indeed be dreadful if the comprehension
of the essence of a right action were not
followed by that right action itself</q>&mdash;this was the
only manner in which these great men thought it
necessary to demonstrate this idea, the contrary
seemed to them to be inconceivable and mad; and
nevertheless this contrary corresponds to the naked
reality which has been demonstrated daily and
hourly from time immemorial. Is it not a <q>dreadful</q>
truth that all that we know about an act is never
sufficient to accomplish it, that the bridge connecting
the knowledge of the act with the act itself has
never yet been built? Acts are never what they
appear to us to be. We have taken great pains
to learn that external things are not as they
appear to us.&mdash;Well! It is the same with internal
phenomena. All moral acts are in reality <q>something
different,</q>&mdash;we cannot say anything more
about them, and all acts are essentially unknown
to us. The general belief, however, has been and
still is quite the contrary: the most ancient realism
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
is against us: up to the present humanity has
thought, <q>An action is what it appears to be.</q>
(In re-reading these words a very expressive passage
from Schopenhauer occurs to me, and I will quote
it as a proof that he, too, without the slightest
scruple, continued to adhere to this moral realism:
<q>Each one of us is in reality a competent and
perfect moral judge, knowing exactly good and
evil, made holy by loving good and despising evil,&mdash;such
is every one of us in so far as the acts of
others and not his own are under consideration, and
when he has merely to approve or disapprove, whilst
the burden of the performance of the acts is borne
by other shoulders. Every one is therefore justified
in occupying as confessor the place of God.</q>)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>117.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>In Prison.</hi>&mdash;My eye, whether it be keen or
weak, can only see a certain distance, and it is
within this space that I live and move: this
horizon is my immediate fate, greater or lesser,
from which I cannot escape. Thus, a concentric
circle is drawn round every being, which has a centre
and is peculiar to himself. In the same way our
ear encloses us in a small space, and so likewise
does our touch. We measure the world by these
horizons within which our senses confine each of
us within prison walls. We say that this is near
and that is far distant, that this is large and that is
small, that one thing is hard and another soft; and
this appreciation of things we call sensation&mdash;but
it is all an error <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>! According to the number
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
of events and emotions which it is on an average
possible for us to experience in a given space of
time, we measure our lives; we call them short or
long, rich or poor, full or empty; and according to
the average of human life we estimate that of other
beings,&mdash;and all this is an error <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>!
</p>

<p>
If we had eyes a hundred times more piercing
to examine the things that surround us, men would
seem to us to be enormously tall; we can even
imagine organs by means of which men would appear
to us to be of immeasurable stature. On the
other hand, certain organs could be so formed as to
permit us to view entire solar systems as if they were
contracted and brought close together like a single
cell: and to beings of an inverse order a single cell
of the human body could be made to appear in its
construction, movement, and harmony as if it were
a solar system in itself. The habits of our senses
have wrapped us up in a tissue of lying sensations
which in their turn lie at the base of all our judgments
and our <q>knowledge,</q>&mdash;there are no means
of exit or escape to the real world! We are like
spiders in our own webs, and, whatever we may
catch in them, it will only be something that our
web is capable of catching.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>118.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What is our Neighbour?</hi>&mdash;What do we conceive
of our neighbour except his limits: I mean
that whereby he, as it were, engraves and stamps
himself in and upon us? We can understand
nothing of him except the changes which take place
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
upon our own person and of which he is the cause,
what we know of him is like a hollow, modelled
space. We impute to him the feelings which his
acts arouse in us, and thus give him a wrong and
inverted positivity. We form him after our knowledge
of ourselves into a satellite of our own system,
and if he shines upon us, or grows dark, and we in
any case are the ultimate cause of his doing so, we
nevertheless still believe the contrary! O world
of phantoms in which we live! O world so perverted,
topsy-turvy and empty, and yet dreamt of
as full and upright!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>119.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Experience and Invention.</hi>&mdash;To however
high a degree a man can attain to knowledge of
himself, nothing can be more incomplete than the
conception which he forms of the instincts constituting
his individuality. He can scarcely name the
more common instincts: their number and force,
their flux and reflux, their action and counteraction,
and, above all, the laws of their nutrition, remain
absolutely unknown to him. This nutrition, therefore,
becomes a work of chance: the daily experiences
of our lives throw their prey now to this instinct and
now to that, and the instincts gradually seize upon
it; but the ebb and flow of these experiences does
not stand in any rational relationship to the nutritive
needs of the total number of the instincts. Two
things, then, must always happen: some cravings
will be neglected and starved to death, while others
will be overfed. Every moment in the life of man
causes some polypous arms of his being to grow and
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
others to wither away, in accordance with the nutriment
which that moment may or may not bring with
it. Our experiences, as I have already said, are all
in this sense means of nutriment, but scattered about
with a careless hand and without discrimination
between the hungry and the overfed. As a consequence
of this accidental nutrition of each particular
part, the polypus in its complete development will
be something just as fortuitous as its growth.
</p>

<p>
To put this more clearly: let us suppose that an
instinct or craving has reached that point when it
demands gratification,&mdash;either the exercise of its
power or the discharge of it, or the filling up of a
vacuum (all this is metaphorical language),&mdash;then
it will examine every event that occurs in the course
of the day to ascertain how it can be utilised with
the object of fulfilling its aim: whether the man
runs or rests, or is angry, or reads or speaks or
fights or rejoices, the unsatiated instinct watches,
as it were, every condition into which the man
enters, and, as a rule, if it finds nothing for itself
it must wait, still unsatisfied. After a little while
it becomes feeble, and at the end of a few days or
a few months, if it has not been satisfied, it will
wither away like a plant which has not been
watered. This cruelty of chance would perhaps be
more conspicuous if all the cravings were as vehement
in their demands as hunger, which refuses to
be satisfied with imaginary dishes; but the great
majority of our instincts, especially those which are
called moral, are thus easily satisfied,&mdash;if it be permitted
to suppose that our dreams serve as compensation
to a certain extent for the accidental
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
absence of <q>nutriment</q> during the day. Why was
last night's dream full of tenderness and tears, that
of the night before amusing and gay, and the
previous one adventurous and engaged in some
continual obscure search? How does it come about
that in this dream I enjoy indescribable beauties of
music, and in that one I soar and fly upwards with
the delight of an eagle to the most distant heights?
</p>

<p>
These inventions in which our instincts of tenderness,
merriment, or adventurousness, or our desire
for music and mountains, can have free play and
scope&mdash;and every one can recall striking instances&mdash;are
interpretations of our nervous irritations
during sleep, very free and arbitrary interpretations
of the movements of our blood and intestines, and
the pressure of our arm and the bed coverings, or
the sound of a church bell, the weathercocks, the
moths, and so on. That this text, which on the
whole is very much the same for one night as
another, is so differently commented upon, that our
creative reason imagines such different causes for
the nervous irritations of one day as compared with
another, may be explained by the fact that the
prompter of this reason was different to-day from
yesterday&mdash;another instinct or craving wished to
be satisfied, to show itself, to exercise itself and be
refreshed and discharged: this particular one being
at its height to-day and another one being at its
height last night. Real life has not the freedom
of interpretation possessed by dream life; it is less
poetic and less unrestrained&mdash;but is it necessary for
me to show that our instincts, when we are awake,
likewise merely interpret our nervous irritations and
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
determine their <q>causes</q> in accordance with their
requirements? that there is no really essential
difference between waking and dreaming! that
even in comparing different degrees of culture, the
freedom of the conscious interpretation of the one
is not in any way inferior to the freedom in dreams
of the other! that our moral judgments and valuations
are only images and fantasies concerning
physiological processes unknown to us, a kind of
habitual language to describe certain nervous irritations?
that all our so-called consciousness is a more
or less fantastic commentary of an unknown text,
one which is perhaps unknowable but yet felt?
</p>

<p>
Consider some insignificant occurrence. Let us
suppose that some day as we pass along a public
street we see some one laughing at us. In accordance
with whatever craving has reached its culminating
point within us at that moment, this incident
will have this or that signification for us; and it
will be a very different occurrence in accordance
with the class of men to which we belong. One
man will take it like a drop of rain, another will
shake it off like a fly, a third person will try to pick
a quarrel on account of it, a fourth will examine
his garments to see if there is anything about them
likely to cause laughter, and a fifth will in consequence
think about what is ridiculous <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, a sixth
will be pleased at having involuntarily contributed
to add a ray of sunshine and mirth to the world,&mdash;in
all these cases some craving is gratified, whether
anger, combativeness, meditation, or benevolence.
This instinct, whatever it may be, has seized upon
that incident as its prey: why that particular one?
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
Because, hungry and thirsty, it was lying in
ambush.
</p>

<p>
Not long ago at 11 o'clock in the morning a man
suddenly collapsed and fell down in front of me as
if struck by lightning. All the women who were
near at once gave utterance to cries of horror, while
I set the man on his feet again and waited until
he recovered his speech. During this time no
muscle of my face moved and I experienced no
sensation of fear or pity; I simply did what was
most urgent and reasonable and calmly proceeded
on my way. Supposing some one had told me on
the previous evening that at 11 o'clock on the
following day a man would fall down in front of
me like this, I should have suffered all kinds of
agonies in the interval, lying awake all night, and
at the decisive moment should also perhaps have
fallen down like the man instead of helping him;
for in the meantime all the imaginable cravings
within me would have had leisure to conceive and
to comment upon this incident. What are our experiences,
then? Much more what we attribute to
them than what they really are. Or should we
perhaps say that nothing is contained in them?
that experiences in themselves are merely works of
fancy?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>120.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To Tranquillise the Sceptic.</hi>&mdash;<q>I don't
know at all what I am doing. I don't know in
the least what I ought to do!</q>&mdash;You are right, but
be sure of this: you are being done at every
moment! Mankind has at all times mistaken the
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
active for the passive: it is its eternal grammatical
blunder.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>121.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cause and Effect.</hi>&mdash;On this mirror&mdash;and our
intellect is a mirror&mdash;something is going on that
indicates regularity: a certain thing is each time followed
by another certain thing. When we perceive
this and wish to give it a name, we call it cause and
effect,&mdash;fools that we are! as if in this we had
understood or could understand anything! For, of
course, we have seen nothing but the images of
causes and effects, and it is just this figurativeness
which renders it impossible for us to see a more
substantial relation than that of sequence!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>122.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Purposes in Nature.</hi>&mdash;Any impartial
investigator who examines the history of the eye
and its form in the lower creatures, and sees how
the visual organ was slowly developed, cannot help
recognising that sight was not the first purpose of
the eye, but probably only asserted itself when pure
hazard had contributed to bring together the apparatus.
One single example of this kind, and the
<q>final purposes</q> fall from our eyes like scales.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>123.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reason.</hi>&mdash;How did reason come into the
world? As is only proper, in an irrational manner;
by accident. We shall have to guess at this accident
as a riddle.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>

<div>
<head>124.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What Is Volition?</hi>&mdash;We laugh at a man
who, stepping out of his room at the very minute
when the sun is rising, says, <q>It is my <emph>will</emph> that the
sun shall rise</q>; or at him who, unable to stop a
wheel, says, <q>I <emph>wish</emph> it to roll</q>; or, again, at him who,
thrown in a wrestling match, says, <q>Here I lie, but
here I <emph>wish</emph> to lie.</q> But, joking apart, do we not
act like one of these three persons whenever we use
the expression <q>I wish</q>?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>125.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On the Domain of Freedom.</hi>&mdash;We can <emph>think</emph>
many more things than we can do and experience&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
our faculty of thinking is superficial and is
satisfied with what lies on the surface, it does not
even perceive this surface. If our intellect were
strictly developed in proportion to our power, and
our exercise of this power, the primary principle of
our thinking would be that we can understand only
that which we are able to do&mdash;if, indeed, there is
any understanding at all. The thirsty man is
without water, but the creations of his imagination
continually bring the image of water to his sight,
as if nothing could be more easily procured. The
superficial and easily satisfied character of the intellect
cannot understand real need, and thus feels
itself superior. It is proud of being able to do more,
to run faster, and to reach the goal almost within the
twinkling of an eye: and in this way the domain
of thought, when contrasted with the domain of
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
action, volition, and experience, appears to be the
domain of liberty, while, as I have already stated,
it is nothing but the domain of superficiality and
self-sufficiency.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>126.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Forgetfulness.</hi>&mdash;It has never yet been proved
that there is such a thing as forgetfulness: all that
we know is that we have no power over recollection.
In the meantime we have filled up this gap in our
power with the word <q>forgetfulness,</q> exactly as if
it were another faculty added to our list. But, after
all, what is within our power? If that word fills
up a gap in our power, might not the other words
be found capable of filling up a gap in the knowledge
which we possess of our power?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>127.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>For a Definite Purpose.</hi>&mdash;Of all human actions
probably the least understood are those which
are carried out for a definite purpose, because they
have always been regarded as the most intelligible
and commonplace to our intellect. The great problems
can be picked up in the highways and byways.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>128.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dreaming and Responsibility.</hi>&mdash;You would
wish to be responsible for everything except your
dreams! What miserable weakness, what lack of
logical courage! Nothing contains more of your
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
own work than your dreams! Nothing belongs to
you so much! Substance, form, duration, actor,
spectator&mdash;in these comedies you act as your
complete selves! And yet it is just here that you
are afraid and ashamed of yourselves, and even
Oedipus, the wise Oedipus, derived consolation
from the thought that we cannot be blamed for
what we dream. From this I must conclude that
the great majority of men must have some dreadful
dreams to reproach themselves with. If it were
otherwise, to how great an extent would these
nocturnal fictions have been exploited in the
interests of man's pride! Need I add that the
wise Oedipus was right, that we are really not
responsible for our dreams any more than for our
waking hours, and that the doctrine of free will has
as its parents man's pride and sense of power!
Perhaps I say this too often; but that does not
prove that it is not true.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>129.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Alleged Combat of Motives.</hi>&mdash;People
speak of the <q>combat of motives,</q> but they designate
by this expression that which is not a combat
of motives at all. What I mean is that, in
our meditative consciousness, the consequences of
different actions which we think we are able to
carry out present themselves successively, one after
the other, and we compare these consequences in
our mind. We think we have come to a decision
concerning an action after we have established to
our own satisfaction that the consequences of this
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
action will be favourable. Before we arrive at this
conclusion, however, we often seriously worry because
of the great difficulties we experience in
guessing what the consequences are likely to be,
and in seeing them in their full importance, without
exception&mdash;and, after all this, we must reckon up any
fortuitous elements that are likely to arise. Then
comes the chief difficulty: all the consequences
which we have with such difficulty determined one
by one must be weighed on some scales against
each other; and it only too often comes about that,
owing to the difference in the quality of all the conceivable
consequences, both scales and weights are
lacking for this casuistry of advantage.
</p>

<p>
Even supposing, however, that in this case we
are able to overcome the difficulty, and that mere
hazard has placed in our scales results which permit
of a mutual balance, we have now, in the idea of
the consequences of a particular action, a motive
for performing this very action, but only one motive!
When we have finally decided to act, however, we
are fairly often influenced by another order of motives
than those of the <q>image of the consequences.</q>
What brings this about may be the habitual working
of our inner machinery, or some little encouragement
on the part of a person whom we fear or
honour or love, or the love of comfort which prefers
to do that which lies nearest; or some stirring of
the imagination provoked at the decisive moment
by some event of trifling importance; or some
physical influence which manifests itself quite unexpectedly;
a mere whim brings it about; or
the outburst of a passion which, as it accidentally
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
happens, is ready to burst forth&mdash;in a word, motives
operate which we do not understand very well, or
which we do not understand at all, and which
we can never balance against one another in
advance.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that a contest is going on among
these motives too, a driving backwards and forwards,
a rising and lowering of the parts, and it is
this which would be the real <q>contest of motives,</q>
something quite invisible and unknown to us. I
have calculated the consequences and the successes,
and in doing so have set a very necessary motive
in the line of combat with the other motives,&mdash;but
I am as little able to draw up this battle line as to
see it: the battle itself is hidden from my sight,
as likewise is the victory, as victory; for I certainly
come to know what I shall finally do, but I cannot
know what motive has in the end proved to be the
victor. Nevertheless, we are decidedly not in the
habit of taking all these unconscious phenomena
into account, and we generally conceive of the preliminary
stages of an action only so far as they
are conscious: thus we mistake the combat of the
motives for a comparison of the possible consequences
of different actions,&mdash;a mistake that
brings with it most important consequences, and
consequences that are most fatal to the development
of morals.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>130.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Aims? Will?</hi>&mdash;We have accustomed ourselves
to believe in two kingdoms, the domain of purposes
and volition, and the domain of chance. In
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
this latter domain everything is done senselessly,
there is a continual going to and fro without any
one being able to say why or wherefore. We stand
in awe of this powerful realm of the great cosmic
stupidity, for in most instances we learn to know
it when it falls down upon the other world, that
of aims and intentions, like a slate from a roof,
always overwhelming some beautiful purpose of
ours.
</p>

<p>
This belief in these two kingdoms arises from
ancient romanticism and legend: we clever dwarfs,
with all our will and aims, are interfered with,
knocked down, and very often crushed to death
by those ultra-stupid giants, the accidents,&mdash;but
in spite of this we should not like to be deprived
of the fearful poetry of their proximity, for these
monsters very often make their appearance when
life in the spider's web of definite aims has become
too tiresome or too anxious for us, and they sometimes
bring about a divine diversion when their
hands for once tear the whole web in pieces,&mdash;not
that these irrational beings ever intend to do what
they do, or even observe it. But their coarse and
bony hands rend our web as if it were thin air.
</p>

<p>
Moira was the name given by the Greeks to
this realm of the incalculable and of sublime and
eternal limitedness; and they set it round their
gods like a horizon beyond which they could neither
see nor act,&mdash;with that secret defiance of the gods
which one meets with in different nations; the gods
are worshipped, but a final trump card is held in
readiness to play against them. As instances of
this we may recollect that the Indians and the
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
Persians, who conceived all their gods as having
to depend upon the sacrifices of mortals, so that
if it came to the worst the mortals could, at least,
let the gods die of starvation; or the gods of the
stubborn and melancholy Scandinavians, who enjoyed
a quiet revenge in the thought that a twilight
of the gods was to come as some compensation for
the perpetual fear which their evil gods caused them.
The case of Christianity was very different, for its
essential feelings were not those of the Indians,
Persians, Greeks, or Scandinavians. Christianity
commanded its disciples to worship in the dust the
spirit of power, and to kiss the very dust. It gave
the world to understand that this omnipotent <q>realm
of stupidity</q> was not so stupid as it seemed, and that
we, on the contrary, were stupid when we could not
perceive that behind this realm stood God Himself:
He who, although fond of dark, crooked and wonderful
ways, at last brought everything to a <q>glorious
end.</q> This new myth of God, who had hitherto
been mistaken for a race of giants or Moira, and who
was now Himself the spinner and weaver of webs
and purposes even more subtle than those of our
own intellect&mdash;so subtle, indeed, that they appear to
be incomprehensible and even unreasonable&mdash;this
myth was so bold a transformation and so daring a
paradox that the over-refined ancient world could
not resist it, however extravagant and contradictory
the thing seemed: for, let it be said in confidence,
there was a contradiction in it,&mdash;if our intellect cannot
divine the intellect and aims of God, how did
it divine this quality of its intellect and this quality
of God's intellect?
</p>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
In more modern times, indeed, the doubt has increased
as to whether the slate that falls from the
roof is really thrown by <q>Divine love,</q> and mankind
again harks back to the old romance of giants and
dwarfs. Let us learn then, for it is time we did
so, that even in our supposed separate domain of
aims and reason the giants likewise rule. And
our aims and reason are not dwarfs, but giants.
And our own webs are just as often and as clumsily
rent by ourselves as by the slate. And not everything
is purpose that is called purpose, and still
less is everything will that is called will. And if
you come to the conclusion, <q>Then there is only
one domain, that of stupidity and hazard?</q> it must
be added that possibly there is only one domain,
possibly there is neither will nor aim, and we may
only have imagined these things. Those iron hands
of necessity that shake the dice-box of chance continue
their game indefinitely: hence, it must happen
that certain throws perfectly resemble every degree
of appropriateness and good sense. It may be that
our own voluntary acts and purposes are merely
such throws, and that we are too circumscribed
and vain to conceive our extremely circumscribed
state! that we ourselves shake the dice-box with
iron hands, and do nothing in our most deliberate
actions but play the game of necessity. Possibly!
To rise beyond this <q>possibly</q> we should indeed
have been guests in the Underworld, playing at dice
and betting with Proserpine at the table of the
goddess herself.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<div>
<head>131.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moral Fashions.</hi>&mdash;How moral judgments as
a whole have changed! The greatest marvels of
the morality of antiquity, such as Epictetus, knew
nothing of the glorification, now so common, of
the spirit of sacrifice, of living for others: after the
fashion of morality now prevailing we should really
call them immoral; for they fought with all their
strength for their own ego and against all sympathy
for others, especially for the sufferings and moral
imperfections of others. Perhaps they would reply
to us by saying, <q>If you feel yourselves to be such
dull and ugly people, by all means think of others
more than yourselves. You will be quite right in
doing so!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>132.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Last Echoes of Christianity In
Morals.</hi>&mdash;<q>On n'est bon que par la pitié: il
faut donc qu'il y ait quelque pitié dans tous nos
sentiments</q>&mdash;so says morality nowadays. And
how does this come about? The fact that the
man who performs social, sympathetic, disinterested,
and benevolent actions is now considered as the
moral man: this is perhaps the most general
effect, the most complete transformation, that
Christianity has produced in Europe; perhaps in
spite of itself, and not by any means because this
was part of its essential doctrine. But this was
the residuum of those Christian feelings that prevailed
at the time when the contrary and thoroughly
selfish faith in the <q>one thing needful,</q> the absolute
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
importance of eternal and personal salvation, together
with the dogmas upon which this belief had
rested, were gradually receding, and when the
auxiliary beliefs in <q>love</q> and <q>love of one's
neighbour,</q> harmonising with the extraordinary
practice of charity by the Church, were thereby
coming to the front. The more people gradually
became separated from the dogmas, the more did
they seek some sort of justification for this separation
in a cult of the love of humanity: not to fall
short in this respect of the Christian ideal, but to
excel it if possible, was the secret stimulus of all
the French free-thinkers from Voltaire to Auguste
Comte; and this latter with his famous moral
formula <q>vivre pour autrui</q> has indeed out-christianised
even Christianity!
</p>

<p>
It was Schopenhauer in Germany and John
Stuart Mill in England who were the means of
bringing into the greatest prominence this doctrine
of sympathetic affections and of pity or utility to
others as a principle of action; but these men
themselves were only echoes. From about the
time of the French Revolution these doctrines
have manifested themselves in various places with
enormous force. Since then they have shown themselves
in their coarsest as well has their most subtle
form, and all Socialistic principles have almost
involuntarily taken their stand on the common
ground of this doctrine. At the present time there
is perhaps no more widely spread prejudice than
that of thinking that we know what really and
truly constitutes morality. Every one now seems
to learn with satisfaction that society is beginning
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
to adapt the individual to the general needs, and
that it is at the same time the happiness and
sacrifice of each one to consider himself as a useful
member and instrument of the whole. They have
still, however, doubts as to the form in which this
whole is to be looked for, whether in a state already
existing, or in one which has yet to be established,
or in a nation, or in an international brotherhood, or
in new and small economic communities. On this
point there is still much reflection, doubt, struggling,
excitement, and passion; but it is pleasant
and wonderful to observe the unanimity with which
the <q>ego</q> is called upon to practice self-denial,
until, in the form of adaptation to the whole, it
once again secures its own fixed sphere of rights
and duties,&mdash;until, indeed, it has become something
quite new and different. Nothing else is being
attempted, whether admitted or not, than the complete
transformation, even the weakening and
suppression of the individual: the supporters of
the majority never tire of enumerating and anathematising
all that is bad, hostile, lavish, expensive,
and luxurious in the form of individual
existence that has hitherto prevailed; they hope
that society may be administered in a cheaper, less
dangerous, more uniform, and more harmonious
way when nothing is left but large corporations
and their members. All that is considered as good
which in any way corresponds to this desire for
grouping men into one particular society, and to
the minor cravings which necessarily accompany
this desire,&mdash;this is the chief moral current of our
time; sympathy and social feelings are working
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
hand in glove. (Kant is still outside of this movement:
he expressly teaches that we should be
insensible to the sufferings of others if our benevolence
is to have any moral value,&mdash;a doctrine
which Schopenhauer, very angrily, as may easily
be imagined, described as the Kantian absurdity.)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>133.</head>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>No longer thinking of One's Self.</hi></q>&mdash;Let
us seriously consider why we should jump into
the water to rescue some one who has just fallen in
before our eyes, although we may have no particular
sympathy for him. We do it for pity's sake; no
one thinks now but of his neighbour,&mdash;so says
thoughtlessness. Why do we experience grief and
uneasiness when we see some one spit blood, although
we may be really ill-disposed towards him
and wish him no good? Out of pity; we have
ceased to think of ourselves,&mdash;so says thoughtlessness
again. The truth is that in our pity&mdash;I mean by
this what we erroneously call <q>pity</q>&mdash;we no longer
think consciously of ourselves, but quite unconsciously,
exactly as when slipping we unconsciously
make the best counter-motions possible in order to
recover our balance, and in doing so clearly use all
our intelligence. A mishap to another offends us;
it would bring our impotence, or perhaps our cowardice,
into strong relief if we could do nothing to help
him; or in itself it would give rise to a diminution of
our honour in the eyes of others and of ourselves.
Or again, accidents that happen to others act as
finger-posts to point out our own danger, and even as
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
indications of human peril and frailty they can produce
a painful effect upon us. We shake off this
kind of pain and offence, and balance it by an act
of pity behind which may be hidden a subtle form
of self-defence or even revenge. That at bottom
we strongly think of ourselves may easily be divined
from the decision that we arrive at in all cases where
we can avoid the sight of those who are suffering or
starving or wailing. We make up our minds not
to avoid such people when we can approach them
as powerful and helpful ones, when we can safely
reckon upon their applause, or wish to feel the contrast
of our own happiness, or, again, when we hope
to get rid of our own boredom. It is misleading to
call the suffering that we experience at such a sight,
and which may be of a very different kind, commiseration.
For in all cases it is a suffering from
which the suffering person before us is free: it is our
own suffering, just as his suffering is his own. It is
thus only this personal feeling of misery that we
get rid of by acts of compassion. Nevertheless, we
never act thus from one single motive: as it is certain
that we wish to free ourselves from suffering thereby,
it is also certain that by the same action we yield to
an impulse of pleasure. Pleasure arises at the sight
of a contrast to our own condition, at the knowledge
that we should be able to help if only we wished to
do so, at the thought of the praise and gratitude
which we should gain if we did help, at the very act
of helping, in so far as this might prove successful
(and because something which is gradually seen to
be successful gives pleasure to the doer); but even
more particularly at the feeling that our intervention
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
brings to an end some deplorable injustice,&mdash;even
the outburst of one's indignation is invigorating.
</p>

<p>
All this, including even things still more subtle,
comprises <q>pity.</q> How clumsily with this one
word does language fall foul of such a complex and
polyphonous organism! That pity, on the other
hand, is identical with the suffering the sight of
which brings it about, or that it has a particularly
subtle and penetrating comprehension of it: this is
in contradiction to experience, and he who has glorified
pity under these two heads lacked sufficient
experience in the domain of morals. That is why
I am seized with some doubts when reading of the
incredible things attributed by Schopenhauer to
pity. It is obvious that he thereby wished to
make us believe in the great novelty he brought
forward, viz., that pity&mdash;the pity which he observed
so superficially and described so badly&mdash;was the
source of all and every past and future moral action,&mdash;and
all this precisely because of those faculties
which he had begun by attributing to it.
</p>

<p>
What is it in the end that distinguishes men
without pity from men who are really compassionate?
In particular, to give merely an approximate
indication, they have not the sensitive feeling for
fear, the subtle faculty for perceiving danger: nor
yet is their vanity so easily wounded if something
happens which they might have been able to prevent,&mdash;the
caution of their pride commands them
not to interfere uselessly with the affairs of others;
they even act on the belief that every one should
help himself and play his own cards. Again, in
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
most cases they are more habituated to bearing pain
than compassionate men, and it does not seem at
all unjust to them that others should suffer, since
they themselves have suffered. Lastly, the state
of soft-heartedness is as painful to them as is the
state of stoical impassability to compassionate men:
they have only disdainful words for sensitive hearts,
as they think that such a state of feeling is dangerous
to their own manliness and calm bravery,&mdash;they
conceal their tears from others and wipe them
off, angry with themselves. They belong to a
different type of egoists from the compassionate
men,&mdash;but to call them, in a distinct sense, evil and
the compassionate ones good, is merely a moral
fashion which has had its innings, just as the reverse
fashion had also its innings, and a long innings, too.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>134.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To what Extent we must Beware of Pity.</hi>&mdash;Pity,
in so far as it actually gives rise to suffering&mdash;and
this must be our only point of view here&mdash;is a
weakness, like every other indulgence in an injurious
emotion. It increases suffering throughout the
world, and although here and there a certain amount
of suffering may be indirectly diminished or removed
altogether as a consequence of pity, we must not
bring forward these occasional consequences, which
are on the whole insignificant, to justify the nature
of pity which, as has already been stated, is prejudicial.
Supposing that it prevailed, even if only
for one day, it would bring humanity to utter
ruin. In itself the nature of pity is no better than
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
that of any other craving; it is only where it is
called for and praised&mdash;and this happens when
people do not understand what is injurious in it, but
find in it a sort of joy&mdash;that a good conscience becomes
attached to it; it is only then that we willingly
yield to it, and do not shrink from acknowledging
it. In other circumstances where it is understood
to be dangerous, it is looked upon as a weakness;
or, as in the case of the Greeks, as an unhealthy
periodical emotion the danger of which might be
removed by temporary and voluntary discharges.
If a man were to undertake the experiment of deliberately
devoting his attention to the opportunities
afforded by practical life for the exercise of pity,
and were over and over again to picture in his own
mind the misery he might meet with in his immediate
surroundings, he would inevitably become
melancholy and ill. If, however, he wished in any
sense of the word to serve humanity as a physician,
he would have to take many precautions with respect
to this feeling, as otherwise it would paralyse him
at all critical moments, undermine the foundations
of his knowledge, and unnerve his helpful and
delicate hand.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>135.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arousing Pity.</hi>&mdash;Among savages men think
with a moral shudder of the possibility of becoming
an object of pity, for such a state they regard as
deprived of all virtue. Pitying is equivalent to despising:
they do not want to see a contemptible
being suffer, for this would afford them no enjoyment.
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
On the other hand, to behold one of their
enemies suffering, some one whom they look upon
as their equal in pride, but whom torture cannot
induce to give up his pride, and in general to see
some one suffer who refuses to lower himself by
appealing for pity&mdash;which would in their eyes be
the most profound and shameful humiliation&mdash;this
is the very joy of joys. Such a spectacle excites
the deepest admiration in the soul of the savage,
and he ends by killing such a brave man when it
is in his power, afterwards according funeral
honours to the unbending one. If he had groaned,
however; if his countenance had lost its expression
of calm disdain; if he had shown himself to be contemptible,&mdash;well,
in such a case he might have
been allowed to live like a dog: he would no longer
have aroused the pride of the spectator, and pity
would have taken the place of admiration.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>136.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Happiness in Pity.</hi>&mdash;If, as is the case among
the Hindus, we decree the end and aim of all intellectual
activity to be the knowledge of human
misery, and if for generation after generation this
dreadful resolution be steadily adhered to, pity in
the eyes of such men of hereditary pessimism comes
to have a new value as a preserver of life, something
that helps to make existence endurable, although
it may seem worthy of being rejected with horror
and disgust. Pity becomes an antidote to suicide,
a sentiment which brings pleasure with it and enables
us to taste superiority in small doses. It
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
gives some diversion to our minds, makes our hearts
full, banishes fear and lethargy, and incites us to
speak, to complain, or to act: it is a relative happiness
when compared with the misery of the
knowledge that hampers the individual on every
side, bewilders him, and takes away his breath.
Happiness, however, no matter of what nature it
may be, gives us air and light and freedom of
movement.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>137.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Why Double the <q>Ego</q>?</hi>&mdash;To view our own
experiences in the same light as we are in the habit
of looking at those of others is very comforting
and an advisable medicine. On the other hand, to
look upon the experiences of others and adopt
them as if they were our own&mdash;which is called for
by the philosophy of pity&mdash;would ruin us in a very
short time: let us only make the experiment without
trying to imagine it any longer! The first maxim
is, in addition, undoubtedly more in accordance with
reason and goodwill towards reason; for we estimate
more objectively the value and significance
of an event when it happens to others,&mdash;the value,
for instance, of a death, loss of money or slander.
But pity, taking as its principle of action the injunction,
<q>Suffer the misfortune of another as much
as he himself,</q> would lead the point of view of the
ego with all its exaggerations and deviations to
become the point of view of the other person, the
sympathiser: so that we should have to suffer at
the same time from our own ego and the other's
ego. In this way we would voluntarily overload
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
ourselves with a double irrationality, instead of
making the burden of our own as light as possible.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>138.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Becoming more Tender.</hi>&mdash;Whenever we love
some one and venerate and admire him, and afterwards
come to perceive that he is suffering&mdash;which
always causes us the utmost astonishment, since
we cannot but feel that the happiness we derive
from him must flow from a superabundant source
of personal happiness&mdash;our feelings of love, veneration,
and admiration are essentially changed:
they become more tender; that is, the gap that
separates us seems to be bridged over and there
appears to be an approach to equality. It now
seems possible to give him something in return,
whilst we had previously imagined him as being
altogether above our gratitude. Our ability to
requite him for what we have received from him
arouses in us feelings of much joy and pleasure.
We endeavour to ascertain what can best calm the
grief of our friend, and we give it to him; if he
wishes for kind words, looks, attentions, services, or
presents, we give them; but, above all, if he would
like to see us suffering from the sight of his suffering,
we pretend to suffer, for all this secures for us
the enjoyment of active gratitude, which is equivalent
in a way to good-natured revenge. If he wants
none of these things, and refuses to accept them
from us, we depart from him chilled and sad, almost
mortified; it appears to us as if our gratitude had
been declined, and on this point of honour even the
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
best of men is still somewhat touchy. It results
from all this that even in the best case there is something
humiliating in suffering, and something elevating
and superior in sympathy,&mdash;a fact which
will keep the two feelings apart for ever and ever.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>139.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Higher in Name only.</hi>&mdash;You say that the
morality of pity is a higher morality than that of
stoicism? Prove it! But take care not to measure
the <q>higher</q> and <q>lower</q> degrees of morality once
more by moral yardsticks; for there are no absolute
morals. So take your yardstick from somewhere
else, and be on your guard!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>140.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Praise and Blame.</hi>&mdash;When a war has come to
an unsuccessful conclusion we try to find the man
who is to blame for the war; when it comes to a
successful conclusion we praise the man who is responsible
for it. In all unsuccessful cases attempts
are made to blame somebody, for non-success gives
rise to dejection, against which the single possible
remedy is involuntarily applied; a new incitement
of the sense of power; and this incitement is found
in the condemnation of the <q>guilty</q> one. This
guilty one is not perhaps the scapegoat of the faults
of others; he is merely the victim of the feeble,
humiliated, and depressed people who wish to prove
upon some one that they have not yet lost all their
power. Even self-condemnation after a defeat may
be the means of restoring the feeling of power.
</p>

<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>

<p>
On the other hand, glorification of the originator
is often but an equally blind result of another instinct
that demands its victim,&mdash;and in this case the
sacrifice appears to be sweet and attractive even for
the victim. This happens when the feeling of power
is satiated in a nation or a society by so great and
fascinating a success that a weariness of victory
supervenes and pride wishes to be discharged: a
feeling of self-sacrifice is aroused and looks for its
object. Thus, whether we are blamed or praised
we merely, as a rule, provide opportunities for the
gratification of others, and are only too often caught
up and whirled away for our neighbours to discharge
upon us their accumulated feelings of praise or
blame. In both cases we confer a benefit upon
them for which we deserve no credit and they no
thanks.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>141.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>More Beautiful but Less Valuable.</hi>&mdash;Picturesque
morality: such is the morality of those
passions characterised by sudden outbursts, abrupt
transitions; pathetic, impressive, dreadful, and
solemn attitudes and gestures. It is the semi-savage
stage of morality: never let us be tempted to set it
on a higher plane merely on account of its æsthetic
charms.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>142.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sympathy.</hi>&mdash;In order to understand our neighbour,
that is, in order to reproduce his sentiments in
ourselves, we often, no doubt, plumb the cause of his
feelings, as, for example, by asking ourselves, Why
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
is he sad? in order that we may become sad ourselves
for the same reason. But we much more
frequently neglect to act thus, and we produce these
feelings in ourselves in accordance with the <emph>effects</emph>
which they exhibit in the person we are studying,&mdash;by
imitating in our own body the expression of
his eyes, his voice, his gait, his attitude (or, at any
rate, the likeness of these things in words, pictures,
and music), or we may at least endeavour to mimic
the action of his muscles and nervous system. A
like feeling will then spring up in us as the result
of an old association of movements and sentiments
which has been trained to run backwards and forwards.
We have developed to a very high pitch this
knack of sounding the feelings of others, and when
we are in the presence of any one else we bring this
faculty of ours into play almost involuntarily,&mdash;let
the inquirer observe the animation of a woman's
countenance and notice how it vibrates and quivers
with animation as the result of the continual imitation
and reflection of what is going on around her.
</p>

<p>
It is music, however, more than anything else
that shows us what past-masters we are in the rapid
and subtle divination of feelings and sympathy;
for even if music is only the imitation of an imitation
of feelings, nevertheless, despite its distance
and vagueness, it often enables us to participate in
those feelings, so that we become sad without any
reason for feeling so, like the fools that we are,
merely because we hear certain sounds and rhythms
that somehow or other remind us of the intonation
and the movements, or perhaps even only of the
behaviour, of sorrowful people. It is related of a
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
certain Danish king that he was wrought up to such
a pitch of warlike enthusiasm by the song of a
minstrel that he sprang to his feet and killed five
persons of his assembled court: there was neither
war nor enemy; there was rather the exact opposite;
yet the power of the retrospective inference from a
feeling to the cause of it was sufficiently strong in
this king to overpower both his observation and his
reason. Such, however, is almost invariably the effect
of music (provided that it thrills us), and we have no
need of such paradoxical instances to recognise this,&mdash;the
state of feeling into which music transports
us is almost always in contradiction to the appearance
of our actual state, and of our reasoning power
which recognises this actual state and its causes.
</p>

<p>
If we inquire how it happened that this imitation
of the feelings of others has become so common,
there will be no doubt as to the answer: man being
the most timid of all beings because of his subtle
and delicate nature has been made familiar through
his timidity with this sympathy for, and rapid comprehension
of, the feelings of others, even of animals.
For century after century he saw danger in everything
that was unfamiliar to him, in anything that
happened to be alive, and whenever the spectacle
of such things and creatures came before his eyes
he imitated their features and attitude, drawing at
the same time his own conclusion as to the nature
of the evil intentions they concealed. This interpretation
of all movements and all facial characteristics
in the sense of intentions, man has even brought to
bear on things inanimate,&mdash;urged on as he was by
the illusion that there was nothing inanimate. I
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
believe that this is the origin of everything that we
now call a feeling for nature, that sensation of joy
which men experience at the sight of the sky, the
fields, the rocks, the forests, the storms, the stars,
the landscapes, and spring: without our old habits
of fear which forced us to suspect behind everything
a kind of second and more recondite sense, we should
now experience no delight in nature, in the same
way as men and animals do not cause us to rejoice
if we have not first been deterred by that source of
all understanding, namely, fear. For joy and agreeable
surprise, and finally the feeling of ridicule, are
the younger children of sympathy, and the much
younger brothers and sisters of fear. The faculty
of rapid perception, which is based on the faculty of
rapid dissimulation, decreases in proud and autocratic
men and nations, as they are less timid; but,
on the other hand, every category of understanding
and dissimulation is well known to timid peoples,
and among them is to be found the real home of
imitative arts and superior intelligence.
</p>

<p>
When, proceeding from the theory of sympathy
such as I have just outlined, I turn my attention to
the theory, now so popular and almost sacrosanct,
of a mystical process by means of which pity blends
two beings into one, and thus permits them immediately
to understand one another, when I recollect
that even so clear a brain as Schopenhauer's delighted
in such fantastic nonsense, and that he in
his turn transplanted this delight into other lucid
and semi-lucid brains, I feel unlimited astonishment
and compassion. How great must be the pleasure
we experience in this senseless tomfoolery! How
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
near must even a sane man be to insanity as soon
as he listens to his own secret intellectual desires!&mdash;Why
did Schopenhauer really feel so grateful, so
profoundly indebted to Kant? He revealed on one
occasion the undoubted answer to this question.
Some one had spoken of the way in which the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qualitias occulta</foreign> of Kant's Categorical Imperative
might be got rid of, so that the theory itself might be
rendered intelligible. Whereupon Schopenhauer
gave utterance to the following outburst: <q>An intelligible
Categorical Imperative! Preposterous idea!
Stygian darkness! God forbid that it should ever
become intelligible! The fact that there is actually
something unintelligible, that this misery of the
understanding and its conceptions is limited, conditional,
final, and deceptive,&mdash;this is beyond question
Kant's great gift.</q> Let any one consider whether
a man can be in possession of a desire to gain an
insight into moral things when he feels himself
comforted from the start by a belief in the inconceivableness
of these things! one who still honestly
believes in illuminations from above, in magic, in
ghostly appearances, and in the metaphysical ugliness
of the toad!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>143.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Woe to us if this Impulse should Rage!</hi>&mdash;Supposing
that the impulse towards devotion
and care for others (<q>sympathetic affection</q>) were
doubly as strong as it now is, life on earth could
not be endured. Let it only be considered how
many foolish things every one of us does day by
day and hour by hour, merely out of solicitude and
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
devotion for himself, and how unbearable he seems
in doing so: and what then would it be like if we
were to become for other people the object of
the stupidities and importunities with which up to
the present they have only tormented themselves!
Should we not then take precipitately to our heels
as soon as one of our neighbours came towards us?
And would it not be necessary to overwhelm this
sympathetic affection with the abuse that we now
reserve for egoism?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>144.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Closing our Ears to the Complaints of
others.</hi>&mdash;When we let our sky be clouded by the
complaints and suffering of other mortals, who
must bear the consequences of such gloom? No
doubt those other mortals, in addition to all their
other burdens! If we are merely to be the echoes
of their complaints, we cannot accord them either
help or comfort; nor can we do so if we were
continually keeping our ears open to listen to them,&mdash;unless
we have learnt the art of the Olympians,
who, instead of trying to make themselves unhappy,
endeavoured to feel edified by the misfortunes of
mankind. But this is something too Olympian for
us, although, in our enjoyment of tragedy, we have
already taken a step towards this ideal divine cannibalism.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>145.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Unegoistic.</q></hi>&mdash;This man is empty and wishes
to be filled, that one is over-full and wishes to be
emptied: both of them feel themselves urged on
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
to look for an individual who can help them. And
this phenomenon, interpreted in a higher sense, is
in both cases known by the same name, <q>love.</q>
Well? and could this love be something unegoistic?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>146.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Looking Beyond our Neighbour.</hi>&mdash;What?
Ought the nature of true morality to consist for us
in fixing our eyes upon the most direct and immediate
consequences of our action for other people,
and in our coming to a decision accordingly? This
is only a narrow and bourgeois morality, even
though it may be a morality: but it seems to me
that it would be more superior and liberal to look
beyond these immediate consequences for our
neighbour in order to encourage more distant
purposes, even at the risk of making others suffer,&mdash;as,
for example, by encouraging the spirit of
knowledge in spite of the certainty that our free-thought
will have the instant effect of plunging
others into doubt, grief, and even worse afflictions.
Have we not at least the right to treat our neighbour
as we treat ourselves? And if, where we are concerned,
we do not think in such a narrow and bourgeois
fashion of immediate consequences and sufferings,
why should we be compelled to act thus in
regard to our neighbour? Supposing that we felt
ready to sacrifice ourselves, what is there to prevent
us from sacrificing our neighbour together with ourselves,&mdash;just
as States and Sovereigns have hitherto
sacrificed one citizen to the others, <q>for the sake of
the general interest,</q> as they say?
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
We too, however, have general interests, perhaps
even more general than theirs: so why may we not
sacrifice a few individuals of this generation for
the benefit of generations to come? so that their
affliction, anxiety, despair, blunders, and misery
may be deemed essential because a new plough is
to break up the ground and render it fertile for all.
Finally, we communicate the disposition to our
neighbour by which he is enabled to feel himself a
victim: we persuade him to carry out the task for
which we employ him. Are we then devoid of all
pity? If, however, we wish to achieve a victory
over ourselves beyond our pity, is not this a higher
and more liberal attitude and disposition than that
in which we only feel safe after having ascertained
whether an action benefits or harms our neighbour?
On the contrary, it is by means of such sacrifice&mdash;including
the sacrifice of ourselves, as well as of our
neighbours&mdash;that we should strengthen and elevate
the general sense of human power, even supposing
that we attain nothing more than this. But even
this itself would be a positive increase of happiness.
Then, if even this ... but not a word more! You
have understood me at a glance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>147.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Cause of <q>Altruism.</q></hi>&mdash;Men have on
the whole spoken of love with so much emphasis
and adoration because they have hitherto always
had so little of it, and have never yet been satiated
with this food: in this way it became their ambrosia.
If a poet wished to show universal benevolence in
the image of a Utopia, he would certainly have to
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
describe an agonising and ridiculous state of things,
the like of which was never seen on earth,&mdash;every
one would be surrounded, importuned, and sighed
for, not as at present, by one lover, but by thousands,
by everybody indeed, as the result of an irresistible
craving which would then be as vehemently insulted
and cursed as selfishness has been by men of past
ages. The poets of this new condition of things,
if they had sufficient leisure to write, would be
dreaming of nothing but the blissful and loveless
past, the divine selfishness of yore, and the wonderful
possibilities in former times of remaining alone,
not being run after by one's friends, and of even
being hated and despised&mdash;or any other odious expressions
which the beautiful animal world in which
we live chooses to coin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>148.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Looking Far Ahead.</hi>&mdash;If, in accordance with
the present definition, only those actions are moral
which are done for the sake of others, and for their
sake only, then there are no moral actions at all!
If, in accordance with another definition, only those
actions are moral which spring from our own free
will, then there are no moral actions in this case
either! What is it, then, that we designate thus,
which certainly exists and wishes as a consequence
to be explained? It is the result of a few intellectual
blunders; and supposing that we were able to free
ourselves from these errors, what would then become
of <q>moral actions</q>? It is due to these errors that
we have up to the present attributed to certain
actions a value superior to what was theirs in reality:
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
we separated them from <q>egoistic</q> and <q>non-free</q>
actions. When we now set them once more in the
latter categories, as we must do, we certainly reduce
their value (their own estimate of value) even below
its reasonable level, because <q>egoistic</q> and <q>non-free</q>
actions have up to the present been under-valued
owing to that alleged profound and essential
difference.
</p>

<p>
In future, then, will these very actions be less
frequently performed, since they will be less highly
esteemed? Inevitably! Or at all events for a
fairly long time, as long as the scale of valuations
remains under the reacting influence of former mistakes!
But we make some return for this by giving
back to men their good courage for the carrying out
of actions that are now reputed to be selfish, and
thus restore their value,&mdash;we relieve men's bad consciences!
and as up to the present egoistic actions
have been by far the most frequent, and will be
so to all eternity, we free the whole conception of
these actions and of life from its evil appearance!
This is a very high and important result. When
men no longer believe themselves to be evil, they
cease to be so.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book III.</head>

<div>
<head>149.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Little Unconventional Actions are
Necessary!</hi>&mdash;To act occasionally in matters of
custom against our own better judgments; to yield
in practice while reserving our own intellectual
liberty; to behave like everybody else and thus to
show ourselves amiable and considerate to all, to
compensate them, as it were, even if only to some
extent, for our unconventional opinions&mdash;all this
among many tolerably liberal-minded men is looked
upon not only as permissible but even as <q>honourable,</q>
<q>humane,</q> <q>tolerant,</q> and <q>unpedantic,</q> or
whatever fine words may be used to lull to sleep
the intellectual conscience. So, for example, one
man, although he may be an atheist, has his infant
baptized in the usual Christian fashion; another
goes through his period of military service, though
he may severely condemn all hatred between nations;
and a third runs into the Church with a girl
because she comes from a religious family, and
makes his vows to a priest without feeling ashamed
of it. <q>It is of no importance if one of us does
what every one else does and has done</q>&mdash;so says
ignorant prejudice! What a profound mistake!
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
For nothing is of greater importance than that a
powerful, long-established, and irrational custom
should be once again confirmed by the act of some
one who is recognised as rational. In this way the
proceeding is thought to be sanctioned by reason
itself! All honour to your opinions! but little
unconventional actions are of still greater value.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>150.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Hazard of Marriages.</hi>&mdash;If I were a god,
and a benevolent god, the marriages of men would
cause me more displeasure than anything else. An
individual can make very great progress within the
seventy years of his life&mdash;yea, even within thirty
years: such progress, indeed, as to surprise even
the gods! But when we then see him exposing the
inheritance and legacy of his struggles and victories,
the laurel crown of his humanity, on the first convenient
peg where any female may pick it to pieces
for him; when we observe how well he can acquire
and how little he is capable of preserving his acquisitions,
and how he does not even dream that by procreation
he might prepare a still more victorious life,&mdash;we
then, indeed, become impatient and say, <q>Nothing
can in the end result from humanity, individuals
are wasted, for all rationality of a great
advance of humanity is rendered impossible by the
hazard of marriages: let us cease from being the
assiduous spectators and fools of this aimless
drama!</q> It was in this mood that the gods of
Epicurus withdrew long ago to their divine seclusion
and felicity: they were tired of men and their love
affairs.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<div>
<head>151.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Here are New Ideals to Invent.</hi>&mdash;At a time
when a man is in love he should not be allowed to
come to a decision about his life and to determine
once and for all the character of his society on account
of a whim. We ought publicly to declare
invalid the vows of lovers, and to refuse them permission
to marry: and this because we should treat
marriage itself much more seriously, so that in cases
where it is now contracted it would not usually be
allowed in future! Are not the majority of marriages
such that we should not care to have them witnessed
by a third party? And yet this third party
is scarcely ever lacking&mdash;the child&mdash;and he is more
than a witness; he is the whipping-boy and scapegoat.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>152.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Formula of Oath.</hi>&mdash;<q>If I am now telling a lie
I am no longer an honourable man, and every one
may say so to my face.</q> I recommend this formula
in place of the present judicial oath and its
customary invocation to the Deity: it is stronger.
There is no reason why even religious men should
oppose it; for as soon as the customary oath no
longer serves, all the religious people will have to
turn to their catechism, which says, <q>Thou shalt
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>153.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Malcontent.</hi>&mdash;He is one of the brave old
warriors: angry with civilisation because he believes
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
that its object is to make all good things&mdash;honour,
rewards, and fair women&mdash;accessible even to
cowards.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>154.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Consolation amid Perils.</hi>&mdash;The Greeks, in
the course of a life that was always surrounded by
great dangers and cataclysms, endeavoured to find
in meditation and knowledge a kind of security of
feeling, a last <foreign rend='italic'>refugium</foreign>. We, who live in a much
more secure state, have introduced danger into
meditation and knowledge, and it is in life itself
that we endeavour to find repose, a refuge from
danger.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>155.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Extinct Scepticism.</hi>&mdash;Hazardous enterprises
are rarer in modern times than in antiquity and in
the Middle Ages, probably because modern times
have no more belief in omens, oracles, stars, and
soothsayers. In other words, we have become incapable
of believing in a future which is reserved
for us, as the ancients did, who&mdash;in contradistinction
to ourselves&mdash;were much less sceptical regarding
that which is to be than that which is.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>156.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Evil through Exuberance.</hi>&mdash;<q>Oh, that we
should not feel too happy!</q>&mdash;such was the secret
fear of the Greeks in their best age. <emph>That</emph> is why
they preached moderation to themselves. And we?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<div>
<head>157.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Worship of Natural Sounds.</hi>&mdash;What
signification can we find in the fact that our culture
is not only indulgent to the manifestations of grief,
such as tears, complaints, reproaches, and attitudes
of rage and humility, but even approves them and
reckons them among the most noble and essential
things?&mdash;while, on the other hand, the spirit of
ancient philosophy looked down upon them with
contempt, without admitting their necessity in any
way. Let us remember how Plato&mdash;who was by
no means one of the most inhuman of the philosophers&mdash;speaks
of the Philoctetus of the tragic
stage. Is it possible that our modern culture is
wanting in <q>philosophy</q>? or, in accordance with
the valuations of those old philosophers, do we perhaps
all form part of the <q>mob</q>?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>158.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Climate for Flattery.</hi>&mdash;In our day
flatterers should no longer be sought at the courts
of kings, since these have all acquired a taste for
militarism, which cannot tolerate flattery. But this
flower even now often grows in abundance in the
neighbourhood of bankers and artists.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>159.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Revivers.</hi>&mdash;Vain men value a fragment
of the past more highly from the moment when
they are able to revive it in their imagination
(especially if it is difficult to do so), they would
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
even like if possible to raise it from the dead. Since,
however, the number of vain people is always very
large, the danger presented by historical studies, if
an entire epoch devotes its attention to them, is by
no means small: too great an amount of strength
is then wasted on all sorts of imaginable resurrections.
The entire movement of romanticism is
perhaps best understood from this point of view.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>160.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vain, Greedy, and not very Wise.</hi>&mdash;Your
desires are greater than your understanding, and
your vanity is even greater than your desires,&mdash;to
people of your type a great deal of Christian practice
and a little Schopenhauerian theory may be
strongly recommended.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>161.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beauty corresponding to the Age.</hi>&mdash;If our
sculptors, painters, and musicians wish to catch the
significance of the age, they should represent beauty
as bloated, gigantic, and nervous: just as the
Greeks, under the influence of their morality of
moderation, saw and represented beauty in the
Apollo di Belvedere. We should, indeed, call him
ugly! But the pedantic <q>classicists</q> have deprived
us of all our honesty!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>162.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Irony of the Present Time.</hi>&mdash;At the
present day it is the habit of Europeans to treat all
matters of great importance with irony, because, as
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
the result of our activity in their service, we have no
time to take them seriously.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>163.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against Rousseau.</hi>&mdash;If it is true that there is
something contemptible about our civilisation, we
have two alternatives: of concluding with Rousseau
that, <q>This despicable civilisation is to blame for
our bad morality,</q> or to infer, contrary to Rousseau's
view, that <q>Our good morality is to blame for this
contemptible civilisation. Our social conceptions
of good and evil, weak and effeminate as they are,
and their enormous influence over both body and
soul, have had the effect of weakening all bodies
and souls and of crushing all unprejudiced, independent,
and self-reliant men, the real pillars of a
strong civilisation: wherever we still find the evil
morality to-day, we see the last crumbling ruins of
these pillars.</q> Thus let paradox be opposed by
paradox! It is quite impossible for the truth to
lie with both sides: and can we say, indeed, that it
lies with either? Decide for yourself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>164.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Perhaps Premature.</hi>&mdash;It would seem at the
present time that, under many different and misleading
names, and often with a great want of
clearness, those who do not feel themselves attached
to morals and to established laws are taking the
first initial steps to organise themselves, and thus
to create a right for themselves; whilst hitherto,
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
as criminals, free-thinkers, immoral men and miscreants,
they have lived beyond the pale of the law,
under the bane of outlawry and bad conscience,
corrupted and corrupting. On the whole, we should
consider this as right and proper, although it
may result in insecurity for the coming century
and compel every one to bear arms.&mdash;There is
thereby a counterforce which continually reminds
us that there is no exclusively moral-making
morality, and that a morality which asserts itself
to the exclusion of all other morality destroys too
much sound strength and is too dearly bought by
mankind. The non-conventional and deviating
people, who are so often productive and inventive,
must no longer be sacrificed: it must never again
be considered as a disgrace to depart from morality
either in actions or thought; many new experiments
must be made upon life and society, and the world
must be relieved from a huge weight of bad conscience.
These general aims must be recognised
and encouraged by all those upright people who
are seeking truth.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>165.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Morality which does not bore one.</hi>&mdash;The
principal moral commandments which a nation
permits its teachers to emphasise again and again
stand in relation to its chief defects, and that is why
it does not find them tiresome. The Greeks, who
so often failed to employ moderation, coolness, fair-mindedness,
and rationality in general, turned a
willing ear to the four Socratic virtues,&mdash;they stood
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
in such need of them, and yet had so little talent
for them!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>166.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>At the Parting of the Ways.</hi>&mdash;Shame!
You wish to form part of a system in which you
must be a wheel, fully and completely, or risk
being crushed by wheels! where it is understood
that each one will be that which his superiors make
of him! where the seeking for <q>connections</q> will
form part of one's natural duties! where no one
feels himself offended when he has his attention
drawn to some one with the remark, <q>He may be
useful to you some time</q>; where people do not feel
ashamed of paying a visit to ask for somebody's intercession,
and where they do not even suspect that
by such a voluntary submission to these morals,
they are once and for all stamped as the common
pottery of nature, which others can employ or break
up of their free will without feeling in any way
responsible for doing so,&mdash;just as if one were to
say, <q>People of my type will never be lacking,
therefore, do what you will with me! Do not
stand on ceremony!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>167.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Unconditional Homage.</hi>&mdash;When I think of
the most read German philosopher, the most
popular German musician, and the most distinguished
German statesman, I cannot but acknowledge
that life is now rendered unusually arduous
for these Germans, this nation of unconditional
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
sentiments, and that, too, by their own great men.
We see three magnificent spectacles spread out before
us: on each occasion there is a river rushing
along in the bed which it has made for itself, and
even so agitated that one thinks at times it intends
to flow uphill. And yet, however we might admire
Schopenhauer, who would not, all things considered,
like to have other opinions than his? Who
in all greater and smaller things would now share the
opinions of Richard Wagner, although there may
be truth in the view expressed by some one: viz.
that wherever Wagner gave or took offence some
problem lay hidden,&mdash;which, however, he did not
unearth for us. And, finally, how many are there
who would be willing and eager to agree with Bismarck,
if only he could always agree with himself,
or were even to show some signs of doing so for the
future! It is true that it is by no means astonishing
to find statesmen without principles, but with dominant
instincts; a versatile mind, actuated by these
dominant and violent instincts, and hence without
principles&mdash;these qualities are looked upon as
reasonable and natural in a statesman. But, alas,
this has up to the present been so un-German; as
un-German as the fuss made about music and the
discord and bad temper excited around the person
of the musician; or as un-German as the new and
extraordinary position taken up by Schopenhauer:
he did not feel himself to be either above things or
on his knees before them&mdash;one or other of these
alternatives might still have been German&mdash;but
he assumed an attitude against things! How
incredible and disagreeable! to range one's self
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
with things and nevertheless be their adversary,
and finally the adversary of one's self,&mdash;what can
the unconditional admirer do with such an example?
And what, again, can he do with three
such examples who cannot keep the peace towards
one another! Here we see Schopenhauer as the
antagonist of Wagner's music, Wagner attacking
Bismarck's politics, and Bismarck attacking Wagnerism
and Schopenhauerism. What remains for
us to do? Where shall we flee with our thirst for
wholesale hero-worship! Would it not be possible
to choose from the music of the musician a few
hundred bars of good music which appealed to the
heart, and which we should like to take to heart because
they are inspired by the heart,&mdash;could we not
stand aside with this small piece of plunder, and
forget the rest? And could we not make a similar
compromise as regards the philosopher and the
statesman,&mdash;select, take to heart, and in particular
forget the rest?
</p>

<p>
Yes, if only forgetfulness were not so difficult!
There was once a very proud man who would
never on any account accept anything, good or
evil, from others,&mdash;from any one, indeed, but himself.
When he wanted to forget, however, he could
not bestow this gift upon himself, and was three
times compelled to conjure up the spirits. They
came, listened to his desire, and said at last, <q>This
is the only thing it is not in our power to give!</q>
Could not the Germans take warning by this
experience of Manfred? Why, then, should the
spirits be conjured up? It is useless. We never
forget what we endeavour to forget. And how
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
great would be the <q>balance</q> which we should
have to forget if we wished henceforth to continue
wholesale admirers of these three great men! It
would therefore be far more advisable to profit by
the excellent opportunity offered us to try something
new, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to advance in the spirit of honesty
towards ourselves and become, instead of a nation
of credulous repetition and of bitter and blind animosity,
a people of conditional assent and benevolent
opposition. We must come to learn in
the first place, however, that unconditional homage
to people is something rather ridiculous, that a
change of view on this point would not discredit
even Germans, and that there is a profound and
memorable saying: <q>Ce qui importe, ce ne sont
point les personnes: mais les choses.</q> This saying
is like the man who uttered it&mdash;great, honest,
simple, and silent,&mdash;just like Carnot, the soldier
and Republican. But may I at the present time
speak thus to Germans of a Frenchman, and a
Republican into the bargain? Perhaps not: perhaps
I must not even recall what Niebuhr in his
time dared to say to the Germans: that no one
had made such an impression of true greatness
upon him as Carnot.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>168.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Model.</hi>&mdash;What do I like about Thucydides,
and how does it come that I esteem him more
highly than Plato? He exhibits the most wide-spread
and artless pleasure in everything typical
in men and events, and finds that each type is
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
possessed of a certain quantity of good sense: it
is this good sense which he seeks to discover. He
likewise exhibits a larger amount of practical justice
than Plato; he never reviles or belittles those men
whom he dislikes or who have in any way injured
him in the course of his life. On the contrary:
while seeing only types, he introduces something
noble and additional into all things and persons;
for what could posterity, to which he dedicates his
work, do with things not typical! Thus this culture
of the disinterested knowledge of the world
attains in him, the poet-thinker, a final marvellous
bloom,&mdash;this culture which has its poet in Sophocles,
its statesman in Pericles, its doctor in Hippocrates,
and its natural philosopher in Democritus:
this culture which deserves to be called by the name
of its teachers, the Sophists, and which, unhappily,
from the moment of its baptism at once begins to
grow pale and incomprehensible to us,&mdash;for henceforward
we suspect that this culture, which was
combated by Plato and all the Socratic schools,
must have been very immoral! The truth of this
matter is so complicated and entangled that we
feel unwilling to unravel it: so let the old error
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>error veritate simplicior</foreign>) run its old course.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>169.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Greek Genius Foreign to us.</hi>&mdash;Oriental
or modern, Asiatic or European: compared with
the ancient Greeks, everything is characterised by
enormity of size and by the revelling in great
masses as the expression of the sublime, whilst in
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
Paestum, Pompeii, and Athens we are astonished,
when contemplating Greek architecture, to see with
what small masses the Greeks were able to express
the sublime, and how they loved to express it thus.
In the same way, how simple were the Greeks in
the idea which they formed of themselves! How
far we surpass them in the knowledge of man!
Again, how full of labyrinths would our souls and
our conceptions of our souls appear in comparison
with theirs! If we had to venture upon an architecture
after the style of our own souls&mdash;(we are
too cowardly for that!)&mdash;a labyrinth would have
to be our model. That music which is peculiar
to us, and which really expresses us, lets this be
clearly seen! (for in music men let themselves go,
because they think there is no one who can see
them hiding behind their music).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>170.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Another Point of View.</hi>&mdash;How we babble
about the Greeks! What do we understand of
their art, the soul of which was the passion for
naked masculine beauty! It was only by starting
therefrom that they appreciated feminine beauty.
For the latter they had thus a perspective quite
different from ours. It was the same in regard to
their love for women: their worship was of a
different kind, and so also was their contempt.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>171.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Food of the Modern Man.</hi>&mdash;He has
learned to digest many things; nay, almost everything;
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
it is his ambition to do so. He would, however,
be really of a higher order if he did not understand
this so well: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>homo pamphagus</foreign> is not the finest
type of the human race. We live between a past
which had a more wayward and deranged taste
than we, and a future which will possibly have a
more select taste,&mdash;we live too much midway.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>172.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tragedy and Music.</hi>&mdash;Men of essentially
warlike disposition, such, for example, as the
ancient Greeks in the time of Æschylus, are
difficult to rouse, and when pity once triumphs
over their hardness they are seized as by a kind
of giddiness or a <q>demoniacal power,</q>&mdash;they feel
themselves overpowered and thrilled by a religious
horror. After this they become sceptical about
their condition; but as long as they are in it they
enjoy the charm of being, as it were, outside themselves,
and the delight of the marvellous mixed with
the bitterest gall of suffering: this is the proper
kind of drink for fighting men,&mdash;something rare,
dangerous, and bitter-sweet, which does not often
fall to one's lot.
</p>

<p>
Tragedy appeals to souls who feel pity in this
way, to those fierce and warlike souls which are
difficult to overcome, whether by fear or pity, but
which lose nothing by being softened from time to
time. Of what use, however, is tragedy to those
who are as open to the <q>sympathetic affections</q>
as the sails of a ship to the wind! When at the
time of Plato the Athenians had become more
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
softened and sensitive, oh, how far they were still
removed from the gushing emotions of the inhabitants
of our modern towns and villages! And yet
even then the philosophers were beginning to complain
of the injurious nature of tragedy. An epoch
full of danger such as that now beginning, in which
bravery and manliness are rising in value, will
perhaps again harden souls to such an extent that
they will once more stand in need of tragic poets:
but in the meantime these are somewhat superfluous,
to put it mildly. For music, too, a better
age may be approaching (it will certainly be a more
evil age!) when artists will have to make their
music appeal to strongly individual beings, beings
which will have become hard and which will be
dominated by the gloomy earnestness of their own
passion; but of what use is music to the little souls
of the present age which is fast passing away, souls
that are too unsteady, ill-developed, half-personal,
inquisitive, and covetous of everything?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>173.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Flatterers of Work.</hi>&mdash;In the glorification
of <q>work</q> and the never-ceasing talk about the
<q>blessing of labour,</q> I see the same secret <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>arrière-pensée</foreign>
as I do in the praise bestowed on impersonal
acts of a general interest, viz. a fear of everything
individual. For at the sight of work&mdash;that is to
say, severe toil from morning till night&mdash;we have
the feeling that it is the best police, viz. that it
holds every one in check and effectively hinders the
development of reason, of greed, and of desire for
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
independence. For work uses up an extraordinary
proportion of nervous force, withdrawing it from
reflection, meditation, dreams, cares, love, and
hatred; it dangles unimportant aims before the
eyes of the worker and affords easy and regular
gratification. Thus it happens that a society
where work is continually being performed will
enjoy greater security, and it is security which is
now venerated as the supreme deity.&mdash;And now,
horror of horrors! it is the <q>workman</q> himself
who has become dangerous; the whole world is
swarming with <q>dangerous individuals,</q> and behind
them follows the danger of dangers&mdash;<emph>the</emph> individuum!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>174.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Moral Fashion of a Commercial
Community.</hi>&mdash;Behind the principle of the present
moral fashion: <q>Moral actions are actions performed
out of sympathy for others,</q> I see the social
instinct of fear, which thus assumes an intellectual
disguise: this instinct sets forth as its supreme,
most important, and most immediate principle that
life shall be relieved of all the dangerous characteristics
which it possessed in former times, and that
every one must help with all his strength towards
the attainment of this end. It is for that reason
that only those actions which keep in view the
general security and the feeling of security of society
are called <q>good.</q> How little joy must men now
have in themselves when such a tyranny of fear
prescribes their supreme moral law, if they make
no objection when commanded to turn their eyes
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
from themselves and to look aside from themselves!
And yet at the same time they have lynx eyes for
all distress and suffering elsewhere! Are we not,
then, with this gigantic intention of ours of smoothing
down every sharp edge and corner in life, utilising
the best means of turning mankind into sand!
Small, soft, round, infinite sand! Is that your
ideal, ye harbingers of the <q>sympathetic affections</q>?
In the meantime even the question remains
unanswered whether we are of more use to
our neighbour in running immediately and continually
to his help,&mdash;which for the most part can
only be done in a very superficial way, as otherwise
it would become a tyrannical meddling and
changing,&mdash;or by transforming ourselves into something
which our neighbour can look upon with
pleasure,&mdash;something, for example, which may be
compared to a beautiful, quiet, and secluded garden,
protected by high walls against storms and the dust
of the roads, but likewise with a hospitable gate.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>175.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Fundamental Basis of a Culture of
Traders.</hi>&mdash;We have now an opportunity of
watching the manifold growth of the culture of a
society of which commerce is the soul, just as
personal rivalry was the soul of culture among the
ancient Greeks, and war, conquest, and law among
the ancient Romans. The tradesman is able to
value everything without producing it, and to value
it according to the requirements of the consumer
rather than his own personal needs. <q>How many
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
and what class of people will consume this?</q> is
his question of questions. Hence, he instinctively
and incessantly employs this mode of valuation and
applies it to everything, including the productions
of art and science, and of thinkers, scholars, artists,
statesmen, nations, political parties, and even entire
ages: with respect to everything produced or
created he inquires into the supply and demand in
order to estimate for himself the value of a thing.
This, when once it has been made the principle of
an entire culture, worked out to its most minute
and subtle details, and imposed upon every kind
of will and knowledge, this is what you men of the
coming century will be proud of,&mdash;if the prophets
of the commercial classes are right in putting that
century into your possession! But I have little belief
in these prophets. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Credat Judæus Apella</foreign>&mdash;to
speak with Horace.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>176.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Criticism of our Ancestors.</hi>&mdash;Why
should we now endure the truth, even about the
most recent past? Because there is now always a
new generation which feels itself in contradiction
to the past and enjoys in this criticism the first-fruits
of its sense of power. In former times the
new generation, on the contrary, wished to base
itself on the old and began to feel conscious of its
power, not only in accepting the opinions of its
ancestors but, if possible, taking them even more
seriously. To criticise ancestral authority was in
former times a vice; but at the present time our
idealists begin by making it their starting-point.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<div>
<head>177.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To learn Solitude.</hi>&mdash;O ye poor fellows in
the great centres of the world's politics, ye young
and talented men, who, urged on by ambition, think
it your duty to propound your opinion of every
event of the day,&mdash;for something is always happening,&mdash;who,
by thus making a noise and raising
a cloud of dust, mistake yourselves for the rolling
chariot of history; who, because ye always listen,
always suit the moment when ye can put in your
word or two, thereby lose all real productiveness.
Whatever may be your desire to accomplish great
deeds, the deep silence of pregnancy never comes
to you! The event of the day sweeps you along
like straws before the wind whilst ye lie under the
illusion that ye are chasing the event,&mdash;poor fellows!
If a man wishes to act the hero on the
stage he must not think of forming part of the
chorus; he should not even know how the chorus
is made up.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>178.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Daily Wear and Tear.</hi>&mdash;These young men
are lacking neither in character, nor talent, nor zeal,
but they have never had sufficient time to choose
their own path; they have, on the contrary, been
habituated from the most tender age to have their
path pointed out to them. At the time when
they were ripe enough to be sent into the <q>desert,</q>
something else was done with them. They were
turned to account, estranged from themselves, and
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
brought up in such a way that they became accustomed
to be worn out by their daily toil. This
was imposed on them as a duty, and now they
cannot do without it; they would not wish it to be
otherwise. The only thing that cannot be refused
to these poor beasts of burden is their <q>holidays</q>&mdash;such
is the name they give to this ideal of leisure
in an overworked century; <q>holidays,</q> in which
they may for once be idle, idiotic, and childish to
their heart's content.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>179.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>As little State as possible!</hi>&mdash;All political
and economic matters are not of such great value
that they ought to be dealt with by the most
talented minds: such a waste of intellect is at
bottom worse than any state of distress. These
matters are, and ever will be, the province of smaller
minds, and others than the smaller minds should
not be at the service of this workshop: it would be
better to let the machinery work itself to pieces
again! But as matters stand at the present time,
when not only do all people believe that they must
know all about it day by day, but wish likewise
to be always busy about it, and in so doing neglect
their own work, it is a great and ridiculous mistake.
The price that has to be paid for the <q>public
safety</q> is far too high, and, what is maddest of all,
we effect the very opposite of <q>public safety</q> a
fact which our own dear century has undertaken
to prove, as if this had never been proved before!
To make society secure against thieves and fire, and
to render it thoroughly fit for all kinds of trade and
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
traffic, and to transform the State in a good and
evil sense into a kind of Providence&mdash;these aims
are low, mediocre, and not by any means indispensable;
and we should not seek to attain them
by the aid of the highest means and instruments
which exist&mdash;means which we should reserve precisely
for our highest and rarest aims! Our epoch,
however much it may babble about economy, is a
spendthrift: it wastes intellect, the most precious
thing of all.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>180.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wars.</hi>&mdash;The great wars of our own day are the
outcome of historical study.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>181.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Governing.</hi>&mdash;Some people govern because of
their passion for governing; others in order that
they may not be governed,&mdash;the latter choose it as
the lesser of two evils.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>182.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rough and Ready Consistency.</hi>&mdash;People say
of a man with great respect, <q>He is a character</q>&mdash;that
is, when he exhibits a rough and ready consistency,
when it is evident even to the dullest eye.
But, whenever a more subtle and profound intellect
sets itself up and shows consistency in a higher
manner, the spectators deny the existence of any
character. That is why cunning statesmen usually
act their comedy under the cloak of a kind of rough
and ready consistency.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<div>
<head>183.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Old and the Young.</hi>&mdash;<q>There is something
immoral about Parliaments,</q>&mdash;so many people
still think,&mdash;<q>for in them views even against the
Government may be expressed.</q>&mdash;<q>We should
always adopt that view of a subject which our
gracious Lord commands,</q>&mdash;this is the eleventh
commandment in many an honest old head, especially
in Northern Germany. We laugh at it as an
out-of-date fashion, but in former times it was the
moral law itself. Perhaps we shall again some day
laugh at that which is now considered as moral by
a generation brought up under a parliamentary
régime, namely, the policy of placing one's party
before one's own wisdom, and of answering every
question concerning the public welfare in such a
way as to fill the sails of the party with a favourable
gust of wind. <q>We must take that view of a
subject which the position of our party calls for</q>&mdash;such
would be the canon. In the service of such
morals we may now behold every kind of sacrifice,
even martyrdom and conquest over one's self.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>184.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The State as a Production of Anarchists.</hi>&mdash;In
countries inhabited by tractable men there
are always a few backsliders and intractable
people. For the present the latter have joined the
Socialists more than any other party. If it should
happen that these people once come to have the
making of the laws, they may be relied upon to
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
impose iron chains upon themselves, and to practise
a dreadful discipline,&mdash;they know themselves! and
they will endure these harsh laws with the knowledge
that they themselves have imposed them&mdash;the
feeling of power and of this particular power
will be too recent among them and too attractive
for them not to suffer anything for its sake.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>185.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beggars.</hi>&mdash;Beggars ought to be suppressed;
because we get angry both when we help them and
when we do not.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>186.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Business Men.</hi>&mdash;Your business is your greatest
prejudice, it binds you to your locality, your society
and your tastes. Diligent in business but lazy in
thought, satisfied with your paltriness and with
the cloak of duty concealing this contentment:
thus you live, and thus you like your children to
be.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>187.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Possible Future.</hi>&mdash;Is it impossible for us
to imagine a social state in which the criminal will
publicly denounce himself and dictate his own
punishment, in the proud feeling that he is thus
honouring the law which he himself has made, that
he is exercising his power, the power of a lawmaker,
in thus punishing himself? He may offend for
once, but by his own voluntary punishment he
raises himself above his offence, and not only expiates
it by his frankness, greatness, and calmness,
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
but adds to it a public benefit.&mdash;Such would be
the criminal of a possible future, a criminal who
would, it is true, presuppose a future legislation
based upon this fundamental idea: <q>I yield in
great things as well as in small only to the law
which I myself have made.</q> How many experiments
must yet be made! How many futures
have yet to dawn upon mankind!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>188.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Stimulants and Food.</hi>&mdash;Nations are deceived
so often because they are always looking for a
deceiver, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a stimulating wine for their senses.
When they can only have this wine they are
glad to put up even with inferior bread. Intoxication
is to them more than nutriment&mdash;this is the
bait with which they always let themselves be
caught! What, to them, are men chosen from
among themselves&mdash;although they may be the
most expert specialists&mdash;as compared with the
brilliant conquerors, or ancient and magnificent
princely houses! In order that he may inspire
them with faith, the demagogue must at least exhibit
to them a prospect of conquest and splendour.
People will always obey, and even do more than
obey, provided that they can become intoxicated
in doing so. We may not even offer them repose
and pleasure without this laurel crown and its
maddening influence.
</p>

<p>
This vulgar taste which ascribes greater importance
to intoxication than nutrition did not by
any means originate in the lower ranks of the
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
population: it was, on the contrary, transplanted
there, and on this backward soil it grows in great
abundance, whilst its real origin must be sought
amongst the highest intellects, where it flourished
for thousands of years. The people is the last
virgin soil upon which this brilliant weed can grow.
Well, then, is it really to the people that we should
entrust politics in order that they may thereby
have their daily intoxication?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>189.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>High Politics.</hi>&mdash;Whatever may be the influence
in high politics of utilitarianism and the
vanity of individuals and nations, the sharpest spur
which urges them onwards is their need for the
feeling of power&mdash;a need which rises not only in
the souls of princes and rulers, but also gushes forth
from time to time from inexhaustible sources in the
people. The time comes again and again when the
masses are ready to stake their lives and their
fortunes, their consciences and their virtue, in order
that they may secure that highest of all enjoyments
and rule as a victorious, tyrannical, and arbitrary
nation over other nations (or at all events think that
they do).
</p>

<p>
On occasions such as these, feelings of prodigality,
sacrifice, hope, confidence, extraordinary
audacity, and enthusiasm will burst forth so
abundantly that a sovereign who is ambitious or
far-sighted will be able to seize the opportunity for
making war, counting upon the good conscience of
his people to hide his injustice. Great conquerors
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
have always given utterance to the pathetic language
of virtue; they have always been surrounded
by crowds of people who felt themselves, as it were,
in a state of exaltation and would listen to none
but the most elevated oratory. The strange madness
of moral judgments! When man experiences
the sensation of power he feels and calls
himself good; and at exactly the same time the
others who have to endure his power call him
evil!&mdash;Hesiod, in his fable of the epochs of man,
has twice in succession depicted the same epoch,
that of the heroes of Homer, and has thus made two
epochs out of one: to those who lived under the
terrible iron heel of those adventurous despots, or
had heard their ancestors speak of them, the epoch
appeared to be evil; but the descendants of those
chivalric races worshipped it as the <q>good old times,</q>
and as an almost ideally blissful age. The poet
could thus not help doing what he did,&mdash;his audience
probably included the descendants of both races.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>190.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Former German Culture.</hi>&mdash;When the
Germans began to interest other European nations,
which is not so very long ago, it was owing to a
culture which they no longer possess to-day, and
which they have indeed shaken off with a blind
ardour, as if it had been some disease; and yet they
have not been able to replace it by anything better
than political and national lunacy. They have in
this way succeeded in becoming even more interesting
to other nations than they were formerly
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
through their culture: and may that satisfy them!
It is nevertheless undeniable that this German
culture has fooled Europeans, and that it did not
deserve the interest shown in it, and much less the
imitation and emulation displayed by other nations
in trying to rival it.
</p>

<p>
Let us look back for a moment upon Schiller,
Wilhelm von Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hegel,
and Schelling; let us read their correspondence and
mingle for a time with the large circle of their
followers: what have they in common, what
characteristics have they, that fill us, as we are now,
partly with a feeling of nausea and partly with pitiful
and touching emotions? First and foremost, the
passion for appearing at all costs to be morally
exalted, and then the desire for giving utterance
to brilliant, feeble, and inconsequential remarks,
together with their fixed purpose of looking upon
everything (characters, passions, times, customs) as
beautiful&mdash;<q>beautiful,</q> alas, in accordance with a
bad and vague taste, which nevertheless pretended
to be of Hellenic origin. We behold in these people
a weak, good-natured, and glistening idealism, which,
above all, wished to exhibit noble attitudes and noble
voices, something at once presumptuous and inoffensive,
and animated by a cordial aversion to
<q>cold</q> or <q>dry</q> reality&mdash;as also to anatomy, complete
passions, and every kind of philosophical continence
and scepticism, but especially towards the
knowledge of nature in so far as it was impossible
to use it as religious symbolism.
</p>

<p>
Goethe, in his own characteristic fashion, observed
from afar these movements of German
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
culture: placing himself beyond their influence,
gently remonstrating, silent, more and more confirmed
in his own better course. A little later, and
Schopenhauer also was an observer of these movements&mdash;a
great deal of the world and devilry of the
world had again been revealed to him, and he
spoke of it both roughly and enthusiastically, for
there is a certain beauty in this devilry! And what
was it, then, that really seduced the foreigners and
prevented them from viewing this movement as
did Goethe and Schopenhauer, or, better, from ignoring
it altogether? It was that faint lustre, that
inexplicable starlight which formed a mysterious
halo around this culture. The foreigners said to
themselves: <q>This is all very very remote from us;
our sight, hearing, understanding, enjoyment, and
powers of valuations are lost here, but in spite of
that there may be some stars! There may be
something in it! Is it possible that the Germans
have quietly discovered some corner of heaven and
settled there? We must try to come nearer to
these Germans.</q> So they did begin to come nearer
to the Germans, while not so very long afterwards
the Germans put themselves to some trouble to get
rid of this starlight halo: they knew only too well
that they had not been in heaven, but only in a
cloud!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>191.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Better Men.</hi>&mdash;They tell me that our art is
meant for the men of the present day, these greedy,
unsatisfied, undisciplined, disgusted, and harassed
spirits, and that it exhibits to them a picture of
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
happiness, exaltation, and unworldliness beside that
of their own brutality, so that for once they may forget
and breathe freely; nay, perhaps find that they
may derive some encouragement towards flight and
conversion from that oblivion. Poor artists, with
such a public as this; half of whose thoughts require
the attention of a priest, and the other half
the attention of an alienist! How much happier
was Corneille&mdash;<q>Our great Corneille!</q> as Madame
de Sévigné exclaimed, with the accent of a woman
in the presence of a whole man,&mdash;how far superior
was his audience, which he could please with
pictures of chivalric virtues, strict duty, generous
devotion, and heroic self-denial! How differently
did he and they love existence, not as coming from
blind and confused <q>will,</q> which we curse because
we cannot destroy it; but loving existence as a
place, so to speak, where greatness joined with
humanity is possible, and where even the greatest
restraint of form, such as submission to the caprice
of priests and princes, could not suppress either the
pride, chivalric feeling, the grace or the intellect of
individuals, but could, on the contrary, be felt as a
charm and incentive, as a welcome contrast to innate
self-glorification and distinction and the inherited
power of volition and passion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>192.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Desire for Perfect Opponents.</hi>&mdash;It
cannot be denied that the French have been the
most Christian nation in the world, not because the
devotion of masses in France has been greater than
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
elsewhere, but because those Christian ideals which
are most difficult to realise have become incarnated
here instead of merely remaining fancies,
intentions, or imperfect beginnings. Take Pascal,
for example, the greatest of all Christians in his
combination of ardour, intellect, and honesty, and
consider what elements had to be combined in his
case! Take Fénelon, the most perfect and attractive
embodiment of ecclesiastical culture in all
its power: a sublime golden mean of whom a
historian would be tempted to prove the impossibility,
whilst in reality he was merely the perfection
of something exceedingly difficult and improbable.
Take Madame de Guyon among her companions,
the French Quietists: and everything that the
eloquence and ardour of the Apostle Paul has endeavoured
to divine with regard to the Christian's
state of semi-divinity, this most sublime, loving,
silent, and ecstatic state is seen verified in her, without,
however, that Jewish obtrusiveness that Paul
showed towards God&mdash;due in the case of Madame
de Guyon to the real old French artlessness in
words and gestures, artlessness at once womanly,
subtle, and distinguished. Consider, again, the
founder of the Trappists&mdash;the last person who
really took seriously the ascetic ideal of Christianity,
not because he was an exception among
Frenchmen, but because he was a true Frenchman:
for up to our own day his gloomy organisation has
not been able to acclimatise itself and to prosper,
except among Frenchmen; and it has followed
them into Alsace and Algeria.
</p>

<p>
Let us not forget the Huguenots, either: that
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
combination of a martial and industrial spirit, refined
manners and Christian severity, has never
been more beautifully exhibited. And it was at
Port Royal that the great Christian erudition beheld
its last era of prosperity; and in France more than
anywhere else great men know how to prosper.
Though not at all superficial, a great Frenchman
has always his apparent superficiality;&mdash;he has, so
to speak, a natural skin for his real contents and
depth,&mdash;while, on the other hand, the depth of a
great German is generally, as it were, closed up in an
ugly-shaped box, like an elixir, which, by means of a
hard and curious covering, endeavours to preserve
itself from the light of day and the touch of thoughtless
hands. And now let us endeavour to find out
why a people like the French, so prolific in perfect
types of Christians, likewise necessarily brought
forth the perfect contrary types, those of unchristian
free-thought! The French free-thinker, in his own
inward being, had to fight against truly great men,
and not, like the free-thinkers of other nations,
merely against dogmas and sublime abortions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>193.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Esprit</foreign> and Morals.</hi>&mdash;The German, who
possesses the secret of knowing how to be tedious
in spite of wit, knowledge, and feeling, and who has
habituated himself to consider tediousness as moral,
is in dread in the presence of French <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>esprit</foreign> lest it
should tear out the eyes of morality&mdash;but a dread
mingled with <q>fascination,</q> like that experienced
by the little bird in the presence of the rattlesnake.
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
Amongst all the celebrated Germans none possessed
more <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>esprit</foreign> than Hegel, but he also had that great
German dread of it which brought about his peculiar
and defective style. For the nature of this style
resembles a kernel, which is wrapped up so many
times in an outer covering that it can scarcely peep
through, now and then glancing forth bashfully and
inquisitively, like <q>young women peeping through
their veils,</q> to use the words of that old woman-hater,
Æschylus. This kernel, however, is a witty
though often impertinent joke on intellectual subjects,
a subtle and daring combination of words,
such as is necessary in a society of thinkers as
gilding for a scientific pill&mdash;but, enveloped as it is
in an almost impenetrable cover, it exhibits itself
as the most abstruse science, and likewise as the
worst possible moral tediousness. Here the Germans
had a permissible form of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>esprit</foreign> and they
revelled in it with such boundless delight that
even Schopenhauer's unusually fine understanding
could not grasp it&mdash;during the whole of his life he
thundered against the spectacle that the Germans
offered to him, but he could never explain it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>194.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vanity of the Teachers of Morals.</hi>&mdash;The
relatively small success which teachers of morals
have met with may be explained by the fact that
they wanted too much at once, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> they were too
ambitious and too fond of laying down precepts
for everybody. In other words, they were beating
the air and making speeches to animals in order to
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
turn them into men; what wonder, then, that the
animals thought this tedious! We should rather
choose limited circles and endeavour to find and
promote morals for them: for instance, we should
make speeches to wolves with the object of turning
them into dogs; but, above all, the greatest success
will remain for the man who does not seek to
educate either everybody or certain limited circles,
but only one single individual, and who cannot be
turned to the right or left from his straight purpose.
The last century was superior to ours precisely
because it possessed so many individually educated
men, as well as educators in the same proportion,
who had made this their life's task, and who with
this task were dignified not only in their own eyes
but in those of all the remaining <q>good society.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>195.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The so-called Classical Education.</hi>&mdash;Alas!
we discover that our life is consecrated to
knowledge and that we should throw it away, nay,
that we should even have to throw it away if this
consecration did not protect us from ourselves: we
repeat this couplet, and not without deep emotion:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thee, Fate, I follow, though I fain would not,</l>
<l>And yet I must, with many a sigh and groan!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And then, in looking backwards over the course of
our lives, we discover that there is one thing that
cannot be restored to us: the wasted period of our
youth, when our teachers did not utilise these ardent
and eager years to lead us to the knowledge of
things, but merely to this so-called <q>classical education</q>!
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
Only think of this wasted youth, when
we were inoculated clumsily and painfully with an
imperfect knowledge of the Greeks and Romans as
well as of their languages, contrary to the highest
principle of all culture, which holds that we should
not give food except to those who hunger for it!
Think of that period of our lives when we had
mathematics and physics forced down our throats,
instead of being first of all made acquainted with
the despair of ignorance, instead of having our little
daily life, our activities, and everything occurring
in our houses, our workshops, in the sky, and in
nature, split up into thousands of problems, painful,
humiliating and irritating problems&mdash;and thus
having our curiosity made acquainted with the
fact that we first of all require a mathematical and
mechanical knowledge before we can be allowed
to rejoice in the absolute logic of this knowledge!
If we had only been imbued with reverence for
those branches of science, if we had only been made
to tremble with emotion&mdash;were it only for once&mdash;at
the struggles, the defeats, and the renewed
combats of those great men, of the martyrdom
which is the history of pure science! But, on the
contrary, we were allowed to develop a certain contempt
for those sciences in favour of historical
training, formal education<note place='foot'><q>Formal education</q> is the name given in Germany to
those branches of learning which tend to develop the logical
faculties, as opposed to <q>material</q> education which deals
with the acquisition of facts and all kinds of <q>useful</q> knowledge.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note> and <q>classicism.</q>
</p>

<p>
And we allowed ourselves to be so easily deceived!
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
Formal education! Might we not have
pointed to the best teachers at our high schools and
asked laughingly, <q>Where then do they keep their
formal education? and, if it is wanting in them,
how can they teach it?</q> And classicism! Did
we get any of that instruction which the ancients
used to impart to their youth? Did we learn to
speak or to write like them? Did we ceaselessly
exercise ourselves in that duel of speech, dialectic?
Did we learn to move as beautifully and proudly
as they did, and to excel as they did in wrestling,
throwing, and boxing? Did we learn anything of
that practical asceticism of all the Greek philosophers?
Did we receive any training in a single
ancient virtue, and in the way in which the ancients
were trained in it? Was not all meditation upon
morals wanting in our education?&mdash;And how much
more the only possible criticism on the subject of
morality, those courageous and earnest attempts to
live according to this or that morality! Did our
teachers ever stir up a feeling in us which the ancients
valued more highly than moderns? Did they in the
spirit of the ancients indicate to us the divisions of
the day and of life, and those aims by which the lives
of the ancients were guided? Did we learn the
ancient languages as we now learn the modern ones,
viz. that we might speak them fluently and well?
Nowhere can we find a real proficiency or any new
faculty as the result of those toilsome years!
only the knowledge of what men had learnt and
were able to do in past ages!
</p>

<p>
And what knowledge! Nothing becomes clearer
to me year by year than the fact that the entire
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Greek and ancient mode of life, however simple and
evident it must seem to our eyes, is in truth very
difficult to understand, and even scarcely accessible,
and that the customary ease with which we babble
about the ancients is either giddy levity or the old
hereditary conceit of our thoughtlessness. We are
deceived by words and ideas which appear to resemble
our own, but behind them there is always
concealed a feeling which must be strange, incomprehensible,
or painful to our modern conceptions.
And these are realms in which boys are allowed
to roam about! Enough: we roamed about them
in our childhood, and there we became seized with
an almost ineradicable antipathy for all antiquity,
the antipathy arising from an intimacy which
was apparently too great! For so great is the
conceit of our classical teachers, who would almost
make it appear that they had gained full control
over the ancients, that they pass on this conceit to
their pupils, together with the suspicion that such
a possession is of little use for making people happy,
but is good enough for honest, foolish old book-worms.
<q>Let them brood over their treasure: it is
well worthy of them!</q>&mdash;It is with this unexpressed
thought that we completed our classical education.
It can't be changed now&mdash;for us, at all events!
But let us not think of ourselves alone!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>196.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Most Personal Questions of Truth.</hi>&mdash;What
am I really doing, and what do I mean by
doing it? That is the question of truth which is
not taught under our present system of education,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
and consequently not asked, because there is no
time for it. On the other hand, we have always time
and inclination for talking nonsense with children,
rather than telling them the truth; for flattering
women who will later on be mothers, rather than
telling them the truth; and for speaking with young
men about their future and their pleasures, rather
than about the truth!
</p>

<p>
But what, after all, are seventy years!&mdash;Time
passes, and they soon come to an end; it matters as
little to us as it does to the wave to know how and
whither it is rolling! No, it might even be wisdom
not to know it.
</p>

<p>
<q>Agreed; but it shows a want of pride not even
to inquire into the matter; our culture does not
tend to make people proud.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So much the better!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it really?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>197.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Enmity of the Germans towards Enlightenment.</hi>&mdash;Let
us consider the contributions
which in the first half of this century the Germans
made to general culture by their intellectual work.
In the first place, let us take the German philosophers:
they went back to the first and oldest stage
of speculation, for they were content with conceptions
instead of explanations, like the thinkers
of dreamy epochs&mdash;a pre-scientific type of philosophy
was thus revived by them. Secondly, we
have the German historians and romanticists: their
efforts on the whole aimed at restoring to the place
of honour certain old and primitive sentiments,
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
especially Christianity, the <q>soul of the people,</q> folk-lore,
folk-speech, mediævalism, Oriental asceticism,
and Hinduism. In the third place, there are the
natural philosophers who fought against the spirit
of Newton and Voltaire, and, like Goethe and
Schopenhauer, endeavoured to re-establish the idea
of a deified or diabolised nature, and of its absolute
ethical and symbolical meaning. The main general
tendency of the Germans was directed against
enlightenment and against those social revolutions
which were stupidly mistaken for the consequences
of enlightenment: the piety towards everything that
existed tried to become piety towards everything
that had ever existed, only in order that heart and
mind might be permitted to fill themselves and
gush forth again, thus leaving no space for future
and novel aims. The cult of feeling took the place
of the cult of reason, and the German musicians, as
the best exponents of all that is invisible, enthusiastic,
legendary, and passionate, showed themselves
more successful in building up the new temple than
all the other artists in words and thoughts.
</p>

<p>
If, in considering these details, we have taken into
account the fact that many good things were said
and investigated, and that many things have since
then been more fairly judged than on any previous
occasion, there yet remains to be said of the whole
that it was a general danger, and one by no means
small, to set knowledge altogether below feeling
under the appearance of an entire and definitive acquaintance
with the past&mdash;and, to use that expression
of Kant, who thus defined his own particular
task&mdash;<q>To make way again for belief by fixing the
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
limits of knowledge.</q> Let us once more breathe
freely, the hour of this danger is past! And yet,
strange to say, the very spirits which these Germans
conjured up with such eloquence have at length become
the most dangerous for the intentions of those
who did conjure them up: history, the comprehension
of origin and development, sympathy with the past,
the new passion for feeling and knowledge, after
they had been for a long time at the service of this
obscure exalted and retrograde spirit, have once
more assumed another nature, and are now soaring
with outstretched wings above the heads of those
who once upon a time conjured them forth, as new
and stronger genii of that very enlightenment to
combat which they had been resuscitated. It is this
enlightenment which we have now to carry forward,&mdash;caring
nothing for the fact that there has been
and still is <q>a great revolution,</q> and again a great
<q>reaction</q> against it: these are but playful crests
of foam when compared with the truly great current
on which we float, and want to float.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>198.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Assigning Prestige to one's Country.</hi>&mdash;It
is the men of culture who determine the rank
of their country, and they are characterised by an
innumerable number of great inward experiences,
which they have digested and can now value
justly. In France and Italy this fell to the lot of
the nobility; in Germany, where up to now the
nobility has been, as a rule, composed of men who
had not much intellect to boast about (perhaps this
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
will soon cease to be the case), it was the task of the
priests, the school teachers and their descendants.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>199.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>We are Nobler.</hi>&mdash;Fidelity, generosity, concern
for one's good reputation: these three qualities,
combined in one sentiment, we call noble, distinguished,
aristocratic; and in this respect we excel
the Greeks. We do not wish to give this up at
any cost under the pretext that the ancient objects
of these virtues have rightly fallen in esteem, but
we wish cautiously to substitute new objects for
these most precious and hereditary impulses. To
understand why the sentiments of the noblest
Greeks must be considered as inferior and scarcely
respectable in the present age, where we are still
under the influence of the chivalric and feudal
nobility, we must recall the words of consolation to
which Ulysses gave utterance in the midst of the
most humiliating situations, <q>Bear with it, my dear
heart, bear with it! Thou hast borne with many
more swinish things<note place='foot'>The reference is to the <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>xx.</hi> 18:
<q>Τέτλαθι δή, κραδίη; καὶ κύντερον ἄλλο ποτ᾽ ἔτλης...</q> etc. Κύντερος, from
κύων, <q>a dog,</q> lit. more dog-like, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> shameless, horrible,
audacious.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note> than these!</q> As an instance
of this mythical example, consider also the tale of
that Athenian officer, who, when threatened with
a stick by another officer in the presence of the
entire general staff, shook off his disgrace with the
words, <q>Strike, but listen to me.</q> (This was
Themistocles, that ingenious Ulysses of the classical
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
epoch, who was just the man at the moment of
disgrace to address to his <q>dear heart</q> that verse
of comfort and affliction.)
</p>

<p>
The Greeks were far from making light of life
and death because of an insult, as we, influenced
by a hereditary spirit of chivalric adventurousness
and self-devotion, are in the habit of doing; or
from looking for opportunities of honourably risking
life and death, as in duels; or from valuing the
preservation of an unstained name (honour) more
than the acquirement of an evil reputation, when the
latter was compatible with glory and the feeling of
power; or from remaining faithful to the prejudices
and the articles of faith of a caste, when these could
prevent them from becoming tyrants. For this is
the ignoble secret of the good Greek aristocrat: out
of sheer jealousy he treats every one of the members
of his caste as being on an equal footing with himself,
but he is ready at every moment to spring like a tiger
on his prey&mdash;despotism. What matter lies, murders,
treason, or the betrayal of his native city to him!
Justice was an extremely difficult matter for people
of this kind to understand&mdash;nay, justice was almost
something incredible. <q>The just man</q> was to the
Greeks what <q>the saint</q> was to the Christians.
When Socrates, however, laid down the axiom,
<q>The most virtuous man is the happiest,</q> they could
not trust their ears; they thought they had heard
a madman speaking. For, as a picture of the
happiest man, every nobleman had in his mind the
cheeky audacity and devilry of the tyrant who
sacrifices everything and every one to his own
exuberance and pleasure. Among people whose
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
imagination secretly raved about such happiness,
the worship of the State could not, of course, have
been too deeply implanted&mdash;but I think that men
whose desire for power does not rage so blindly as
that of the Greek noblemen no longer stand in
need of such idolatry of the State, by means of
which, in past ages, such a passion was kept within
due bounds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>200.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Endurance of Poverty.</hi>&mdash;There is one great
advantage in noble extraction: it makes us endure
poverty better.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>201.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Future of the Nobility.</hi>&mdash;The bearing
of the aristocratic classes shows that, in all the
members of their body the consciousness of power
is continually playing its fascinating game. Thus
people of aristocratic habits, men or women, never
sink worn out into a chair; when every one else
makes himself comfortable, as in a train, for example,
they avoid reclining at their ease; they do
not appear to get tired after standing at Court for
hours at a stretch; they do not furnish their houses
in a comfortable manner, but in such a way as to
produce the impression of something grand and imposing,
as if they had to serve as a residence for
greater and taller beings; they reply to a provoking
speech with dignity and clearness of mind, and not
as if scandalised, crushed, shamed, or out of breath
in the plebeian fashion. As the aristocrat is able
to preserve the appearance of being possessed of a
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
superior physical force which never leaves him, he
likewise wishes by his aspect of constant serenity
and civility of disposition, even in the most trying
circumstances, to convey the impression that his
mind and soul are equal to all dangers and
surprises. A noble culture may resemble, so far
as passions are concerned, either a horseman who
takes pleasure in making his proud and fiery animal
trot in the Spanish fashion,&mdash;we have only to
recollect the age of Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>,&mdash;or like the rider
who feels his horse dart away with him like the
elemental forces, to such a degree that both horse
and rider come near losing their heads, but, owing
to the enjoyment of the delight, do keep very clear
heads: in both these cases this aristocratic culture
breathes power, and if very often in its customs
only the appearance of the feeling of power is
required, nevertheless the real sense of superiority
continues constantly to increase as the result of the
impression which this display makes upon those
who are not aristocrats.
</p>

<p>
This indisputable happiness of aristocratic culture,
based as it is on the feeling of superiority, is
now beginning to rise to ever higher levels; for
now, thanks to the free spirits, it is henceforth
permissible and not dishonourable for people who
have been born and reared in aristocratic circles
to enter the domain of knowledge, where they
may secure more intellectual consecrations and
learn chivalric services even higher than those of
former times, and where they may look up to that
ideal of victorious wisdom which as yet no age
has been able to set before itself with so good a
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
conscience as the period which is about to dawn.
Lastly, what is to be the occupation of the nobility
in the future if it becomes more evident from day
to day that it is less and less indecorus to take
any part in politics?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>202.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Care of the Health.</hi>&mdash;We have scarcely
begun to devote any attention to the physiology of
criminals, and yet we have already reached the inevitable
conclusion that between criminals and madmen
there is no really essential difference: <emph>if we
suppose that the current moral fashion of thinking
is a healthy way of thinking</emph>. No belief, however,
is nowadays more firmly believed in than this one,
so we should not therefore shrink from drawing the
inevitable conclusion and treating the criminal like
a lunatic&mdash;above all, not with haughty pitifulness,
but with medical skill and good will. He
may perhaps be in need of a change of air, a
change of society, or temporary absence: perhaps
of solitude and new occupations&mdash;very well! He
may perhaps feel that it would be to his advantage
to live under surveillance for a short time in order
thus to obtain protection from himself and from a
troublesome tyrannical impulse&mdash;very well! We
should make clear to him the possibility and the
means of curing him (the extermination, transformation,
and sublimation of these impulses), and also,
in the worst cases, the improbability of a cure; and
we should offer to the incurable criminal, who has
become a useless burden to himself, the opportunity
of committing suicide. While holding this in reserve
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
as an extreme measure of relief, we should
neglect nothing which would tend above all to restore
to the criminal his good courage and freedom of
spirit; we should free his soul from all remorse, as
if it were something unclean, and show him how he
may atone for a wrong which he may have done
some one by benefiting some one else, perhaps the
community at large, in such way that he might
even do more than balance his previous offence.
</p>

<p>
All this must be done with the greatest tact!
The criminal must, above all, remain anonymous
or adopt an assumed name, changing his place of
residence frequently, so that his reputation and
future life may suffer as little as possible. At the
present time it is true that the man who has been
injured, apart altogether from the manner in which
this injury might be redressed, wishes for revenge
in addition, and applies to the courts that he may
obtain it&mdash;and this is why our dreadful penal laws
are still in force: Justice, as it were, holding up a
pair of shopkeeper's scales and endeavouring to
balance the guilt by punishment; but can we not
take a step beyond this? Would it not be a great
relief to the general sentiment of life if, while getting
rid of our belief in guilt, we could also get rid of
our old craving for vengeance, and gradually come
to believe that it is a refined wisdom for happy men
to bless their enemies and to do good to those who
have offended them, exactly in accordance with the
spirit of Christian teaching! Let us free the world
from this idea of sin, and take care to cast out with
it the idea of punishment. May these monstrous
ideas henceforth live banished far from the abodes
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
of men&mdash;if, indeed, they must live at all, and do
not perish from disgust with themselves.
</p>

<p>
Let us not forget also, however, that the injury
caused to society and to the individual by the
criminal is of the same species as that caused by
the sick: for the sick spread cares and ill-humour;
they are non-productive, consume the earnings of
others, and at the same time require attendance,
doctors, and support, and they really live on the
time and strength of the healthy. In spite of this,
however, we should designate as inhuman any one
who, for this reason, would wish to wreak vengeance
on the sick. In past ages, indeed, this was actually
done: in primitive conditions of society, and even
now among certain savage peoples, the sick man is
treated as a criminal and as a danger to the community,
and it is believed that he is the resting-place
of certain demoniacal beings who have entered into
his body as the result of some offence he has committed&mdash;those
ages and peoples hold that the sick
are the guilty!
</p>

<p>
And what of ourselves? Are we not yet ripe
for the contrary conception? Shall we not be
allowed to say, <q>The guilty are the sick</q>? No;
the hour for that has not yet come. We still lack,
above all, those physicians who have learnt something
from what we have hitherto called practical
morals and have transformed it into the art and
science of healing. We still lack that intense
interest in those things which some day perhaps
may seem not unlike the <q>storm and stress</q> of
those old religious ecstasies. The Churches have
not yet come into the possession of those who look
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
after our health; the study of the body and of
dietary are not yet amongst the obligatory subjects
taught in our primary and secondary schools; there
are as yet no quiet associations of those people
who are pledged to one another to do without the
help of law courts, and who renounce the punishment
and vengeance now meted out to those who
have offended against society. No thinker has as
yet been daring enough to determine the health of
society, and of the individuals who compose it, by
the number of parasites which it can support; and
no statesman has yet been found to use the ploughshare
in the spirit of that generous and tender
saying, <q>If thou wilt till the land, till it with the
plough; then the bird and the wolf, walking behind
thy plough, will rejoice in thee&mdash;all creatures will
rejoice in thee.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>203.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against Bad Diet.</hi>&mdash;Fie upon the meals which
people nowadays eat in hotels and everywhere else
where the well-off classes of society live! Even when
eminent men of science meet together their tables
groan under the weight of the dishes, in accordance
with the principle of the bankers: the principle of
too many dishes and too much to eat. The result
of this is that dinners are prepared with a view to
their mere appearance rather than the consequences
that may follow from eating them, and that
stimulating drinks are required to help in driving
away the heaviness in the stomach and in the brain.
Fie on the dissoluteness and extreme nervousness
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
which must follow upon all this! Fie upon the
dreams that such repasts bring! Fie upon the arts
and books which must be the desert of such meals!
Despite all the efforts of such people their acts will
taste of pepper and ill-temper, or general weariness!
(The wealthy classes in England stand in great
need of their Christianity in order to be able to
endure their bad digestions and their headaches.)
Finally, to mention not only the disgusting but also
the more pleasant side of the matter, these people
are by no means mere gluttons: our century and its
spirit of activity has more power over the limbs than
the belly. What then is the meaning of these banquets?
They represent! What in Heaven's name
do they represent? Rank?&mdash;no, money! There is
no rank now! We are all <q>individuals</q>! but money
now stands for power, glory, pre-eminence, dignity,
and influence; money at the present time acts as
a greater or lesser moral prejudice for a man in
proportion to the amount he may possess. Nobody
wishes to hide it under a bushel or display
it in heaps on a table: hence money must have
some representative which can be put on the table&mdash;so
behold our banquets!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>204.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Danæ and the God of Gold.</hi>&mdash;Whence
arises this excessive impatience in our day which
turns men into criminals even in circumstances
which would be more likely to bring about the
contrary tendency? What induces one man to use
false weights, another to set his house on fire after
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
having insured it for more than its value, a third
to take part in counterfeiting, while three-fourths
of our upper classes indulge in legalised fraud, and
suffer from the pangs of conscience that follow
speculation and dealings on the Stock Exchange:
what gives rise to all this? It is not real want,&mdash;for
their existence is by no means precarious;
perhaps they have even enough to eat and drink
without worrying,&mdash;but they are urged on day and
night by a terrible impatience at seeing their wealth
pile up so slowly, and by an equally terrible longing
and love for these heaps of gold. In this impatience
and love, however, we see re-appear once
more that fanaticism of the desire for power which
was stimulated in former times by the belief that we
were in the possession of truth, a fanaticism which
bore such beautiful names that we could dare to be
inhuman with a good conscience (burning Jews,
heretics, and good books, and exterminating entire
cultures superior to ours, such as those of Peru
and Mexico). The means of this desire for power
are changed in our day, but the same volcano is
still smouldering, impatience and intemperate love
call for their victims, and what was once done
<q>for the love of God</q> is now done for the love of
money, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> for the love of that which at present
affords us the highest feeling of power and a good
conscience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>205.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The People of Israel.</hi>&mdash;One of the spectacles
which the next century will invite us to witness is
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
the decision regarding the fate of the European Jews.
It is quite obvious now that they have cast their
die and crossed their Rubicon: the only thing that
remains for them is either to become masters of
Europe or to lose Europe, as they once centuries ago
lost Egypt, where they were confronted with similar
alternatives. In Europe, however, they have gone
through a schooling of eighteen centuries such as
no other nation has ever undergone, and the experiences
of this dreadful time of probation have
benefited not only the Jewish community but, even
to a greater extent, the individual. As a consequence
of this, the resourcefulness of the modern
Jews, both in mind and soul, is extraordinary.
Amongst all the inhabitants of Europe it is the
Jews least of all who try to escape from any deep
distress by recourse to drink or to suicide, as other
less gifted people are so prone to do. Every Jew
can find in the history of his own family and of his
ancestors a long record of instances of the greatest
coolness and perseverance amid difficulties and
dreadful situations, an artful cunning in fighting
with misfortune and hazard. And above all it is
their bravery under the cloak of wretched submission,
their heroic <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>spernere se sperni</foreign> that surpasses
the virtues of all the saints.
</p>

<p>
People wished to make them contemptible by
treating them contemptibly for nearly twenty centuries,
and refusing them access to all honourable
positions and dignities, and by pushing them further
down into the meaner trades&mdash;and under this
process indeed they have not become any cleaner.
But contemptible? They have never ceased for a
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
moment from believing themselves qualified for the
very highest functions, nor have the virtues of the
suffering ever ceased to adorn them. Their manner
of honouring their parents and children, the rationality
of their marriages and marriage customs, distinguishes
them amongst all Europeans. Besides
this, they have been able to create for themselves a
sense of power and eternal vengeance from the very
trades that were left to them (or to which they were
abandoned). Even in palliation of their usury we
cannot help saying that, without this occasional
pleasant and useful torture inflicted on their
scorners, they would have experienced difficulty in
preserving their self-respect for so long. For our
self-respect depends upon our ability to make
reprisals in both good and evil things. Nevertheless,
their revenge never urges them on too far, for
they all have that liberty of mind, and even of soul,
produced in men by frequent changes of place,
climate, and customs of neighbours and oppressors,
they possess by far the greatest experience in all
human intercourse, and even in their passions they
exercise the caution which this experience has
developed in them. They are so certain of their
intellectual versatility and shrewdness that they
never, even when reduced to the direst straits, have
to earn their bread by manual labour as common
workmen, porters, or farm hands. In their manners
we can still see that they have never been inspired
by chivalric and noble feelings, or that their bodies
have ever been girt with fine weapons: a certain obtrusiveness
alternates with a submissiveness which
is often tender and almost always painful.
</p>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<p>
Now, however, that they unavoidably inter-marry
more and more year after year with the noblest
blood of Europe, they will soon have a considerable
heritage of good intellectual and physical manners,
so that in another hundred years they will have a
sufficiently noble aspect not to render themselves,
as masters, ridiculous to those whom they will have
subdued. And this is important! and therefore a
settlement of the question is still premature. They
themselves know very well that the conquest of
Europe or any act of violence is not to be thought
of; but they also know that some day or other Europe
may, like a ripe fruit, fall into their hands, if they
do not clutch at it too eagerly. In the meantime,
it is necessary for them to distinguish themselves
in all departments of European distinction and
to stand in the front rank: until they shall have
advanced so far as to determine themselves what
distinction shall mean. Then they will be called
the pioneers and guides of the Europeans whose
modesty they will no longer offend.
</p>

<p>
And then where shall an outlet be found for this
abundant wealth of great impressions accumulated
during such an extended period and representing
Jewish history for every Jewish family, this wealth of
passions, virtues, resolutions, resignations, struggles,
and conquests of all kinds&mdash;where can it find an
outlet but in great intellectual men and works! On
the day when the Jews will be able to exhibit to us
as their own work such jewels and golden vessels
as no European nation, with its shorter and less
profound experience, can or could produce, when
Israel shall have changed its eternal vengeance into
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
an eternal benediction for Europe: then that seventh
day will once more appear when old Jehovah may
rejoice in Himself, in His creation, in His chosen
people&mdash;and all, all of us, will rejoice with Him!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>206.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Impossible Class.</hi>&mdash;Poverty, cheerfulness,
and independence&mdash;it is possible to find these three
qualities combined in one individual; poverty,
cheerfulness, and slavery&mdash;this is likewise a possible
combination: and I can say nothing better to the
workmen who serve as factory slaves; presuming
that it does not appear to them altogether to be
a shameful thing to be utilised as they are, as the
screws of a machine and the stopgaps, as it were,
of the human spirit of invention. Fie on the
thought that merely by means of higher wages the
essential part of their misery, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> their impersonal
enslavement, might be removed! Fie, that we
should allow ourselves to be convinced that, by an
increase of this impersonality within the mechanical
working of a new society, the disgrace of slavery
could be changed into a virtue! Fie, that there
should be a regular price at which a man should
cease to be a personality and become a screw
instead! Are you accomplices in the present
madness of nations which desire above all to
produce as much as possible, and to be as rich as
possible? Would it not be your duty to present
a counter-claim to them, and to show them what
large sums of internal value are wasted in the
pursuit of such an external object?
</p>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
But where is your internal value when you no
longer know what it is to breathe freely; when you
have scarcely any command over your own selves,
and often feel disgusted with yourselves as with some
stale food; when you zealously study the newspapers
and look enviously at your wealthy neighbour, made
covetous by the rapid rise and fall of power, money,
and opinions; when you no longer believe in a philosophy
in rags, or in the freedom of spirit of a man
who has few needs; when a voluntary and idyllic
poverty without profession or marriage, such as
should suit the more intellectual ones among you,
has become for you an object of derision? On
the other hand, the piping of the Socialistic rat-catchers
who wish to inspire you with foolish hopes
is continually sounding in your ears: they tell you
to be ready and nothing further, ready from this
day to the next, so that you wait and wait for
something to come from outside, though living in
all other respects as you lived before&mdash;until this
waiting is at length changed into hunger and thirst
and fever and madness, and the clay of the <foreign rend='italic'>bestia
triumphans</foreign> at last dawns in all its glory. Every
one of you should on the contrary say to himself:
<q>It would be better to emigrate and endeavour to
become a master in new and savage countries, and
especially to become master over myself, changing
my place of abode whenever the least sign of slavery
threatens me, endeavouring to avoid neither adventure
nor war, and, if things come to the worst,
holding myself ready to die: anything rather than
continuing in this state of disgraceful thraldom, this
bitterness, malice and rebelliousness!</q> This would
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
be the proper spirit: the workmen in Europe ought
to make it clear that their position as a class has
become a human impossibility, and not merely, as
they at present maintain, the result of some hard
and aimless arrangement of society. They should
bring about an age of great swarming forth from the
European beehive such as has never yet been seen,
protesting by this voluntary and huge migration
against machines and capital and the alternatives
that now threaten them either of becoming slaves
of the State or slaves of some revolutionary
party.
</p>

<p>
May Europe be freed from one-fourth of her
inhabitants! Both she and they will experience a
sensation of relief. It is only far in the distance, in
the undertaking of vast colonisations, that we shall
be able to observe how much rationality, fairness,
and healthy suspicion mother Europe has incorporated
in her sons&mdash;these sons who could no
longer endure life in the home of the dull old woman,
always running the danger of becoming as bad-tempered,
irritable, and pleasure-seeking as she
herself. The European virtues will travel along
with these workmen far beyond the boundaries of
Europe; and those very qualities which on their
native soil had begun to degenerate into a dangerous
discontent and criminal inclinations will, when
abroad, be transformed into a beautiful, savage
naturalness and will be called heroism; so that at
last a purer air would again be wafted over this
old, over-populated, and brooding Europe of ours.
What would it matter if there was a scarcity of
<q>hands</q>? Perhaps people would then recollect
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
that they had accustomed themselves to many wants
merely because it was easy to gratify them&mdash;it
would be sufficient to unlearn some of these wants!
Perhaps also Chinamen would be called in, and
these would bring with them their modes of living
and thinking, which would be found very suitable
for industrious ants. They would also perhaps
help to imbue this fretful and restless Europe with
some of their Asiatic calmness and contemplation,
and&mdash;what is perhaps most needful of all&mdash;their
Asiatic stability.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>207.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Attitude of the Germans to
Morality.</hi>&mdash;A German is capable of great things,
but he is unlikely to accomplish them, for he obeys
whenever he can, as suits a naturally lazy intellect.
If he is ever in the dangerous situation of having
to stand alone and cast aside his sloth, when he
finds it no longer possible to disappear like a cipher
in a number (in which respect he is far inferior to
a Frenchman or an Englishman), he shows his true
strength: then he becomes dangerous, evil, deep, and
audacious, and exhibits to the light of day that
wealth of latent energy which he had previously
carried hidden in himself, and in which no one, not
even himself, had ever believed. When in such a
case a German obeys himself&mdash;it is very exceptional
for him to do so&mdash;he does so with the same heaviness,
inflexibility, and endurance with which he
obeys his prince and performs his official duties:
so that, as I have said, he is then capable of great
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
things which bear no relation to the <q>weak disposition</q>
he attributes to himself.
</p>

<p>
As a rule, however, he is afraid of depending
upon himself alone, he is afraid of taking the initiative:
that is why Germany uses up so many
officials and so much ink. Light-heartedness is a
stranger to the German; he is too timid for it:
but in entirely new situations which rouse him from
his torpor he exhibits an almost frivolous spirit&mdash;he
then delights in the novelty of his new position
as if it were some intoxicating drink, and he is,
as we know, quite a connoisseur in intoxication.
It thus happens that the German of the present
day is almost always frivolous in politics, though
even here he has the advantage and prejudice
of thoroughness and seriousness; and, although he
may take full advantage of these qualities in negotiations
with other political powers, he nevertheless
rejoices inwardly at being able for once in his life
to feel enthusiastic and capricious, to show his
fondness for innovations, and to change persons,
parties, and hopes as if they were masks. Those
learned German scholars, who hitherto have been
considered as the most German of Germans, were
and perhaps still are as good as the German soldiers
on account of their profound and almost childish
inclination to obey in all external things, and on
account of being often compelled to stand alone in
science and to answer for many things: if they
can only preserve their proud, simple, and patient
disposition, and their freedom from political madness
at those times when the wind changes, we may
yet expect great things from them&mdash;such as they
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
are or such as they were, they are the embryonic
stage of something higher.
</p>

<p>
So far the advantages and disadvantages of the
Germans, including even their learned men, have
been that they were more given to superstition and
showed greater eagerness to believe than any of the
other nations; their vices are, and always have
been, their drunkenness and suicidal inclinations
(the latter a proof of the clumsiness of their intellect,
which is easily tempted to throw away the reins).
Their danger is to be sought in everything that
binds down the faculties of reason and unchains
the passions (as, for example, the excessive use of
music and spirits), for the German passion acts
contrarily to its own advantage, and is as self-destructive
as the passions of the drunkard. Indeed,
German enthusiasm is worth less than that of other
nations, for it is barren. When a German ever did
anything great it was done at a time of danger, or
when his courage was high, with his teeth firmly
set and his prudence on the alert, and often enough
in a fit of generosity.&mdash;Intercourse with these
Germans is indeed advisable, for almost every one
of them has something to give, if we can only
understand how to make him find it, or rather
recover it (for he is very untidy in storing away
his knowledge).
</p>

<p>
Well: when people of this type occupy themselves
with morals, what precisely will be the morality
that will satisfy them? In the first place, they will
wish to see idealised in their morals their sincere
instinct for obedience. <q>Man must have something
which he can implicitly obey</q>&mdash;this is a German
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
sentiment, a German deduction; it is the basis of
all German moral teaching. How different is the
impression, however, when we compare this with
the entire morality of the ancient world! All those
Greek thinkers, however varied they may appear to
us, seem to resemble, as moralists, the gymnastic
teacher who encourages his pupils by saying,
<q>Come, follow me! Submit to my discipline!
Then perhaps you may carry off the prize from all the
other Greeks.</q> Personal distinction: such was the
virtue of antiquity. Submission, obedience, whether
public or private: such is German virtue. Long
before Kant set forth his doctrine of the Categorical
Imperative, Luther, actuated by the same impulse,
said that there surely must be a being in whom man
could trust implicitly&mdash;it was his proof of the existence
of God; it was his wish, coarser and more
popular than that of Kant, that people should implicitly
obey a person and not an idea, and Kant
also finally took his roundabout route through
morals merely that he might secure obedience for
the person. This is indeed the worship of the
German, the more so as there is now less worship
left in his religion.
</p>

<p>
The Greeks and Romans had other opinions on
these matters, and would have laughed at such
<q>there must be a being</q>: it is part of the boldness
of their Southern nature to take up a stand against
<q>implicit belief,</q> and to retain in their inmost
heart a trace of scepticism against all and every
one, whether God, man, or idea. The thinker of
antiquity went even further, and said <foreign rend='italic'>nil admirari</foreign>:
in this phrase he saw reflected all philosophy. A
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
German, Schopenhauer, goes so far in the contrary
direction as to say: <foreign rend='italic'>admirari id est philosophari</foreign>.
But what if, as happens now and then, the German
should attain to that state of mind which would
enable him to perform great things? if the hour of
exception comes, the hour of disobedience? I do
not think Schopenhauer is right in saying that the
single advantage the Germans have over other
nations is that there are more atheists among them
than elsewhere; but I do know this: whenever the
German reaches the state in which he is capable of
great things, he invariably raises himself above
morals! And why should he not? Now he has
something new to do, viz. to command&mdash;either himself
or others! But this German morality of his has
not taught him how to command! Commanding
has been forgotten in it.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book IV.</head>

<div>
<head>208.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Question of Conscience.</hi>&mdash;<q>Now, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in summa</foreign>,
tell me what this new thing is that you want.</q>&mdash;<q>We
no longer wish causes to be sinners and effects
to be executioners.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>209.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Utility of the strictest Theories.</hi>&mdash;People
are indulgent towards a man's moral
weaknesses, and in this connection they use a coarse
sieve, provided that he always professes to hold the
most strict moral theories. On the other hand, the
lives of free-thinking moralists have always been
examined closely through a microscope, in the tacit
belief that an error in their lives would be the best
argument against their disagreeable knowledge.<note place='foot'>If this aphorism seems obscure, the reader may take
Tolstoi as an example of the first class and Nietzsche as an
example of the second. Tolstoi's inconsistencies are generally
glossed over, because he professed the customary moral
theories of the age, while Nietzsche has had to endure the
most searching criticism because he did not. In Nietzsche's
case, however, the scrutiny has been in vain; for, having no
unworkable Christian theories to uphold, unlike Tolstoi,
Nietzsche's life is not a series of compromises. The career
of the great pagan philosopher was, in essence, much more
saintly than that of the great Christian. How different from
Tolstoi, too, was that noble Christian, Pascal, who, from the
inevitable clash of his creed and his nature, died at thirty-eight,
while his weaker epigone lived in the fulness of his
fame until he was over eighty!&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div>
<head>210.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The <q>Thing in Itself.</q></hi>&mdash;We used to ask
formerly: What is the ridiculous?&mdash;as if there were
something above and beyond ourselves that possessed
the quality of provoking laughter, and we exhausted
ourselves in trying to guess what it was (a
theologian even held that it might be <q>the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>naïveté</foreign>
of sin</q>). At the present time we ask: What is
laughter? how does it arise? We have considered
the point, and finally reached the conclusion that
there is nothing which is good, beautiful, sublime, or
evil in itself; but rather that there are conditions
of soul which lead us to attribute such qualities to
things outside ourselves and in us. We have taken
back their predicates from things; or we have at
all events recollected that we have merely lent the
things these predicates. Let us be careful that this
insight does not cause us to lose the faculty of lending,
and that we do not become at the same time
wealthier and more avaricious.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>211.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To those who Dream of Immortality.</hi>&mdash;So
you desire the everlasting perpetuity of this
beautiful consciousness of yourselves? Is it not
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
shameful? Do you forget all those other things
which would in their turn have to support <emph>you</emph> for
all eternity, just as they have borne with you up
to the present with more than Christian patience?
Or do you think that you can inspire them with
an eternally pleasant feeling towards yourself? A
single immortal man on earth would imbue everyone
around him with such a disgust for him that
a general epidemic of murder and suicide would be
brought about. And yet, ye petty dwellers on earth,
with your narrow conceptions of a few thousand
little minutes of time, ye would wish to be an everlasting
burden on this everlasting universal existence!
Could anything be more impertinent? After
all, however, let us be indulgent towards a being
of seventy years: he has not been able to exercise
his imagination in conceiving his own <q>eternal
tediousness</q>&mdash;he had not time enough for that!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>212.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wherein we know Ourselves.</hi>&mdash;As soon as
one animal sees another it mentally compares itself
with it; and men of uncivilised ages did the same.
The consequence is that almost all men come to
know themselves only as regards their defensive
and offensive faculties.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>213.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Men whose Lives have been Failures.</hi>&mdash;Some
men are built of such stuff that society is at
liberty to do what it likes with them&mdash;they will do
well in any case, and will not have to complain of
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
having failed in life. Other men are formed of such
peculiar material&mdash;it need not be a particularly
noble one, but simply rarer&mdash;that they are sure to
fare ill except in one single instance: when they
can live according to their own designs,&mdash;in all
other cases the injury has to be borne by society.
For everything that seems to the individual to
be a wasted or blighted life, his entire burden of
discouragement, powerlessness, sickness, irritation,
covetousness, is attributed by him to society&mdash;and
thus a heavy, vitiated atmosphere is gradually
formed round society, or, in the most favourable
cases, a thundercloud.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>214.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What Indulgence!</hi>&mdash;You suffer, and call
upon us to be indulgent towards you, even when
in your suffering you are unjust towards things and
men! But what does our indulgence matter!
You, however, should take greater precautions for
your own sake! That's a nice way of compensating
yourself for your sufferings, by imposing still further
suffering on your own judgment! Your own
revenge recoils upon yourselves when you start
reviling something: you dim your own eyes in this
way, and not the eyes of others; you accustom
yourself to looking at things in the wrong way, and
with a squint.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>215.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Morality of Victims.</hi>&mdash;<q>Enthusiastic
sacrifice,</q> <q>self-immolation</q>&mdash;these are the catch-words
of your morality, and I willingly believe that
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
you, as you say, <q>mean it honestly</q>: but I know
you better than you know yourselves, if your
<q>honesty</q> is capable of going arm in arm with such
a morality. You look down from the heights of this
morality upon that other sober morality which calls
for self-control, severity, and obedience; you even
go so far as to call it egoistic&mdash;and you are indeed
frank towards yourselves in saying that it displeases
you&mdash;it must displease you! For, in sacrificing
and immolating yourselves with such enthusiasm,
you delight in the intoxication of the thought that
you are now one with the powerful being, God or
man, to whom you are consecrating yourselves:
you revel in the feeling of his power, which is again
attested by this sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
In reality, however, you only <emph>appear</emph> to sacrifice
yourselves; for your imagination turns you into
gods and you enjoy yourselves as such. Judged
from the point of view of this enjoyment, how poor
and feeble must that other <q>egoistic</q> morality of
obedience, duty, and reason seem to you: it is displeasing
to you because in this instance true self-sacrifice
and self-surrender are called for, without the
victim thinking himself to be transformed into a god,
as you do. In a word, you want intoxication and
excess, and this morality which you despise takes
up a stand against intoxication and excess&mdash;no
wonder it causes you some displeasure!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>216.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Evil People and Music.</hi>&mdash;Should the full
bliss of love, which consists in unlimited confidence,
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
ever have fallen to the lot of persons other than
those who are profoundly suspicious, evil, and bitter?
For such people enjoy in this bliss the gigantic, unlooked-for,
and incredible <emph>exception</emph> of their souls!
One day they are seized with that infinite, dreamy
sensation which is entirely opposed to the remainder
of their private and public life, like a
delicious enigma, full of golden splendour, and impossible
to be described by mere words or similes.
Implicit confidence makes them speechless&mdash;there
is even a species of suffering and heaviness in this
blissful silence; and this is why souls that are overcome
with happiness generally feel more grateful
to music than others and better ones do: for they
see and hear through music, as through a coloured
mist, their love becoming, as it were, more distant,
more touching, and less heavy. Music is the only
means that such people have of observing their
extraordinary condition and of becoming aware of
its presence with a feeling of estrangement and
relief. When the sound of music reaches the ears
of every lover he thinks: <q>It speaks of me, it
speaks in my stead; it knows everything!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>217.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Artist.</hi>&mdash;The Germans wish to be transported
by the artist into a state of dreamy
passion; by his aid the Italians wish to rest
from their real passions; the French wish him
to give them an opportunity of showing their
judgment and of making speeches. So let us
be just!
</p>

</div>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<div>
<head>218.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To deal like an Artist with One's Weaknesses.</hi>&mdash;If
we must positively have weaknesses
and come in the end to look upon them as laws
beyond ourselves, I wish that everybody may be
possessed of as much artistic capacity as will enable
him to set off his virtues by means of his weaknesses,
and to make us, through his weaknesses,
desirous of acquiring his virtues: a power which
great musicians have possessed in quite an exceptional
degree. How frequently do we notice in
Beethoven's music a coarse, dogmatic, and impatient
tone; in Mozart, the joviality of an honest
man, whose heart and mind have not overmuch to
give us; in Richard Wagner, an abrupt and aggressive
restlessness, in the midst of which, just as the
most patient listener is on the point of losing his
temper, the composer regains his powers, and likewise
the others. Through their very weaknesses,
these musicians have created in us an ardent desire
for their virtues, and have given us a palate which is
ten times more sensitive to every note of this tuneful
intellect, tuneful beauty, and tuneful goodness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>219.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Deceit in Humiliation.</hi>&mdash;By your foolishness
you have done a great wrong to your neighbour
and destroyed his happiness irretrievably&mdash;and
then, having overcome your vanity, you humble
yourself before him, surrender your foolishness to
his contempt, and fancy that, after this difficult
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
scene, which is an exceedingly painful one for you,
everything has been set right, that your own voluntary
loss of honour compensates your neighbour for
the injury you have done to his happiness. With
this feeling you take your leave comforted, believing
that your virtue has been re-established.
</p>

<p>
Your neighbour, however, suffers as intensely as
before. He finds nothing to comfort him in the
fact that you have been irrational and have told
him so: on the contrary, he remembers the painful
appearance you presented to him when you were
disparaging yourself in his presence&mdash;it is as if
another wound had been inflicted on him. He
does not think of revenging himself, however; and
cannot conceive how a proper balance can be struck
between you and him. In point of fact, you have
been acting that scene for yourself and before
yourself: you invited a witness to be present, not
on his account, but on your own&mdash;don't deceive
yourself!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>220.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dignity and Timidity.</hi>&mdash;Ceremonies, official
robes and court dresses, grave countenances, solemn
aspects, the slow pace, involved speech&mdash;everything,
in short, known as dignity&mdash;are all pretences
adopted by those who are timid at heart: they
wish to make themselves feared (themselves or the
things they represent). The fearless (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> originally
those who naturally inspire others with awe)
have no need of dignity and ceremonies: they
bring into repute&mdash;or, still more, into ill-repute&mdash;honesty
and straightforward words and bearing,
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
as characteristics of their self-confident awefulness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>221.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Morality of Sacrifice.</hi>&mdash;The morality
which is measured by the spirit of sacrifice is that
of a semi-civilised state of society. Reason in this
instance gains a hard-fought and bloody victory
within the soul; for there are powerful contrary
instincts to be overcome. This cannot be brought
about without the cruelty which the sacrifices to
cannibal gods demand.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>222.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where Fanaticism is to be Desired.</hi>&mdash;Phlegmatic
natures can be rendered enthusiastic
only by being fanaticised.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>223.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Dreaded Eye.</hi>&mdash;Nothing is dreaded more
by artists, poets, and writers than the eye which
sees through their little deceptions and subsequently
notices how often they have stopped at the boundary
where the paths branch off either to innocent delight
in themselves or to the straining after effect; the
eye which checks them when they try to sell little
things dear, or when they try to exalt and adorn
without being exalted themselves; the eye which,
despite all the artifices of their art, sees the thought
as it first presented itself to them, perhaps as a
charming vision of light, perhaps also, however, as
a theft from the whole world, or as an everyday
conception which they had to expand, contract,
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
colour, wrap up, and spice, in order to make something
out of it, instead of the thought making
something out of them.&mdash;Oh, this eye, which sees
in your work all your restlessness, inquisitiveness,
and covetousness, your imitation and exaggeration
(which is only envious imitation) which knows both
your blush of shame and your skill in concealing
it from others and interpreting it to yourselves!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>224.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The <q>Edifying</q> Element in our Neighbour's
Misfortune.</hi>&mdash;He is in distress, and
straightway the <q>compassionate</q> ones come to
him and depict his misfortune to him. At last they
go away again, satisfied and elevated, after having
gloated over the unhappy man's misfortune and
their own, and spent a pleasant Sunday afternoon.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>225.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To be quickly Despised.</hi>&mdash;A man who speaks
a great deal, and speaks quickly, soon sinks exceedingly
low in our estimation, even when he speaks
rationally&mdash;not only to the extent that he annoys
us personally, but far lower. For we conjecture
how great a burden he has already proved to many
other people, and we thus add to the discomfort
which he causes us all the contempt which we
presume he has caused to others.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>226.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Relations with Celebrities.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> But why
do you shun this great man?&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> I should not like
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
to misunderstand him. Our defects are incompatible
with one another: I am short-sighted and
suspicious, and he wears his false diamonds as
willingly as his real ones.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>227.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Chain-Wearers.</hi>&mdash;Beware of all those
intellects which are bound in chains! clever women,
for example, who have been banished by fate to
narrow and dull surroundings, amid which they grow
old. True, there they lie in the sun, apparently
lazy and half-blind; but at every unknown step, at
everything unexpected, they start up to bite: they
revenge themselves on everything that has escaped
their kennel.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>228.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Revenge in Praise.</hi>&mdash;Here we have a written
page which is covered with praise, and you call it
flat; but when you find out that revenge is concealed
in this praise you will find it almost too subtle,
and you will experience a great deal of pleasure in
its numerous delicate and bold strokes and similes.
It is not the man himself, but his revenge, which is
so subtle, rich, and ingenious: he himself is scarcely
aware of it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>229.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pride.</hi>&mdash;Ah, not one of you knows the feeling
of the tortured man after he has been put to the
torture, when he is being carried back to his cell,
and his secret with him!&mdash;he still holds it in a
stubborn and tenacious grip. What know ye of
the exultation of human pride?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<div>
<head>230.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Utilitarian.</q></hi>&mdash;At the present time men's
sentiments on moral things run in such labyrinthic
paths that, while we demonstrate morality to one
man by virtue of its utility, we refute it to another
on account of this utility.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>231.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On German Virtue.</hi>&mdash;How degenerate in its
taste, how servile to dignities, ranks, uniforms, pomp,
and splendour must a nation have been, when it
began to consider the simple as the bad, the simple
man (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>schlicht</foreign>) as the bad man (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>schlecht</foreign>)! We
should always oppose the moral bumptiousness of
the Germans with this one little word <q>bad,</q> and
nothing else.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>232.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>From a Dispute.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Friend, you have talked
yourself hoarse.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Then I am refuted, so let's
drop the subject.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>233.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The <q>Conscientious</q> Ones.</hi>&mdash;Have you
noticed the kind of men who attach the greatest
value to the most scrupulous conscientiousness?
Those who are conscious of many mean and petty
sentiments, who are anxiously thinking of and
about themselves, are afraid of others, and are
desirous of concealing their inmost feelings as far
as possible. They endeavour to impose upon
themselves by means of this strict conscientiousness
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
and rigorousness of duty, and by the stern and harsh
impression which others, especially their inferiors,
cannot fail to receive of them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>234.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dread of Fame.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> The endeavour to avoid
one's renown, the intentional offending of one's
panegyrists, the dislike of hearing opinions about
one's self, and all through fear of renown: instances
like these are to be met with; they actually
exist&mdash;believe it or not!&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> They are found,
no doubt! They exist! A little patience, Sir
Arrogance!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>235.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Refusing Thanks.</hi>&mdash;We are perfectly justified
in refusing a request, but it is never right to refuse
thanks&mdash;or, what comes to the same thing, to accept
them coldly and conventionally. This gives deep
offence&mdash;and why?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>236.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Punishment.</hi>&mdash;A strange thing, this punishment
of ours! It does not purify the criminal; it
is not a form of expiation; but, on the contrary, it
is even more defiling than the crime itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>237.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Party Grievances.</hi>&mdash;In almost every party
there is a ridiculous, but nevertheless somewhat
dangerous grievance. The sufferers from it are
those who have long been the faithful and honourable
upholders of the doctrine propagated by the
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
party, and who suddenly remark that one day a
much stronger figure than themselves has got the
ear of the public. How can they bear being reduced
to silence? So they raise their voices, sometimes
changing their notes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>238.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Striving for Gentleness.</hi>&mdash;When a vigorous
nature has not an inclination towards cruelty, and
is not always preoccupied with itself; it involuntarily
strives after gentleness&mdash;this is its distinctive
characteristic. Weak natures, on the other hand,
have a tendency towards harsh judgments&mdash;they
associate themselves with the heroes of the contempt
of mankind, the religious or philosophical traducers
of existence, or they take up their position behind
strict habits and punctilious <q>callings</q>: in this
way they seek to give themselves a character and a
kind of strength. This is likewise done quite involuntarily.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>239.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Hint to Moralists.</hi>&mdash;Our musicians have
made a great discovery. They have found out that
interesting ugliness is possible even in their art;
this is why they throw themselves with such enthusiastic
intoxication into this ocean of ugliness,
and never before has it been so easy to make music.
It is only now that we have got the general,
dark-coloured background, upon which every
luminous ray of fine music, however faint, seems
tinged with golden emerald lustre; it is only now
that we dare to inspire our audience with feelings
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
of impetuosity and indignation, taking away their
breath, so to speak, in order that we may afterwards,
in an interval of restful harmony, inspire them with
a feeling of bliss which will be to the general
advantage of a proper appreciation of music.
</p>

<p>
We have discovered the contrast: it is only now
that the strongest effects are possible&mdash;and cheap.
No one bothers any more about good music. But
you must hurry up! When any art has once made
this discovery, it has but a short space of time to
live.&mdash;Oh, if only our thinkers could probe into the
depths of the souls of our musicians when listening
to their music! How long we must wait until we
again have an opportunity of surprising the inward
man in the very act of his evil doing, and his innocence
of this act! For our musicians have not
the slightest suspicion that it is their own history,
the history of the disfigurement of the soul, which
they are transposing into music. In former times
a good musician was almost forced by the exigencies
of his art to become a good man&mdash;and now!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>240.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Morality of the Stage.</hi>&mdash;The man who
imagines that the effect of Shakespeare's plays is a
moral one, and that the sight of Macbeth irresistibly
induces us to shun the evil of ambition, is mistaken,
and he is mistaken once more if he believes
that Shakespeare himself thought so. He who is
truly obsessed by an ardent ambition takes delight
in beholding this picture of himself; and when the
hero is driven to destruction by his passion, this is
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
the most pungent spice in the hot drink of this delight.
Did the poet feel this in another way? How
royally and with how little of the knave in him does
his ambitious hero run his course from the moment
of his great crime! It is only from this moment that
he becomes <q>demoniacally</q> attractive, and that he
encourages similar natures to imitate him.&mdash;There
is something demoniacal here: something which is
in revolt against advantage and life, in favour of a
thought and an impulse. Do you think that Tristan
and Isolde are warnings against adultery, merely
because adultery has resulted in the death of both
of them? This would be turning poets upside down,
these poets who, especially Shakespeare, are in love
with the passions in themselves, and not less so
with the readiness for death which they give rise to:
this mood in which the heart no more clings to life
than a drop of water does to the glass. It is not
the guilt and its pernicious consequences which
interests these poets&mdash;Shakespeare as little as
Sophocles (in the <hi rend='italic'>Ajax</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Philoctetes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Œdipus</hi>)&mdash;however
easy it might have been in the cases just
mentioned to make the guilt the lever of the play,
it was carefully avoided by the poets.
</p>

<p>
In the same way the tragic poet by his images
of life does not wish to set us against life. On
the contrary, he exclaims; <q>It is the charm of
charms, this exciting, changing, and dangerous
existence of ours, so often gloomy and so often
bathed in sun! Life is an adventure&mdash;whichever
side you may take in life it will always retain this
character!</q>&mdash;Thus speaks the poet of a restless and
vigorous age, an age which is almost intoxicated and
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
stupefied by its superabundance of blood and energy,
in an age more evil than our own: and this is why
it is necessary for us to adapt and accommodate
ourselves first to the purpose of a Shakespearian
play, that is, by misunderstanding it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>241.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Fear and Intelligence.</hi>&mdash;If that which is
now expressly maintained is true, viz. that the
cause of the black pigment of the skin must not be
sought in light, might this phenomenon perhaps be
the ultimate effect of frequent fits of passion accumulated
for century after century (and an afflux
of blood under the skin)? while in other and more
intelligent races the equally frequent spasms of
fear and blanching may have resulted in the white
colour of the skin?&mdash;For the degree of timidity is
the standard by which the intelligence may be
measured; and the fact that men give themselves
up to blind anger is an indication that their animal
nature is still near the surface, and is longing for an
opportunity to make its presence felt once more.
Thus a brownish-grey would probably be the
primitive colour of man&mdash;something of the ape and
the bear, as is only proper.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>242.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Independence.</hi>&mdash;Independence (which in its
weakest form is called <q>freedom of thought</q>) is
the type of resignation which the tyrannical man
ends by accepting&mdash;he who for a long time had
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
been looking for something to govern, but without
finding anything except himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>243.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The two Courses.</hi>&mdash;When we endeavour to
examine the mirror in itself we discover in the end
that we can detect nothing there but the things
which it reflects. If we wish to grasp the things
reflected we touch nothing in the end but the
mirror.&mdash;This is the general history of knowledge.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>244.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Delight in Reality.</hi>&mdash;Our present inclination
to take delight in reality&mdash;for almost every one of
us possesses it&mdash;can only be explained by the fact
that we have taken delight in the unreal for such
a long time that we have got tired of it. This
inclination in its present form, without choice and
without refinement, is not without danger&mdash;its least
danger is its want of taste.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>245.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Subtlety of the Feeling of Power.</hi>&mdash;Napoleon
was greatly mortified at the fact that he
could not speak well, and he did not deceive himself
in this respect: but his thirst for power, which
never despised the slightest opportunity of showing
itself, and which was still more subtle than his subtle
intellect, led him to speak even worse than he might
have done. It was in this way that he revenged
himself upon his own mortification (he was jealous
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
of all his emotions because they possessed power)
in order to enjoy his autocratic pleasure.
</p>

<p>
He enjoyed this pleasure a second time in respect
to the ears and judgment of his audience, as if it
were good enough for them to be addressed in this
way. He even secretly enjoyed the thought of
bewildering their judgment and good taste by the
thunder and lightning of his highest authority&mdash;that
authority which lies in the union of power and
genius&mdash;while both his judgment and his good taste
held fast proudly and indifferently to the truth that
he did not speak well.&mdash;Napoleon, as the complete
and fully developed type of a single instinct, belongs
to ancient humanity, whose characteristic&mdash;the
simple construction and ingenious development and
realisation of a single motive or a small number of
motives&mdash;may be easily enough recognised.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>246.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Aristotle and Marriage.</hi>&mdash;Insanity makes
its appearance in the children of great geniuses, and
stupidity in those of the most virtuous&mdash;so says
Aristotle. Did he mean by this to invite exceptional
men to marry?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>247.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Origin of a bad Temperament.</hi>&mdash;Injustice
and instability in the minds of certain men,
their disordered and immoderate manner, are the
ultimate consequences of the innumerable logical
inexactitudes, superficialities, and hasty conclusions
of which their ancestors have been guilty. Men of
a good temperament, on the other hand, are descended
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
from solid and meditative races which have
set a high value upon reason&mdash;whether for praiseworthy
or evil purposes is of no great importance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>248.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dissimulation as a Duty.</hi>&mdash;Kindness has
been best developed by the long dissimulation which
endeavoured to appear as kindness: wherever great
power existed the necessity for dissimulation of
this nature was recognised&mdash;it inspires security
and confidence, and multiplies the actual sum of
our physical power. Falsehood, if not actually
the mother, is at all events the nurse of kindness.
In the same way, honesty has been brought
to maturity by the need for a semblance of
honesty and integrity: in hereditary aristocracies.
The persistent exercise of such a dissimulation ends
by bringing about the actual nature of the thing
itself: the dissimulation in the long run suppresses
itself, and organs and instincts are the unexpected
fruits in this garden of hypocrisy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>249.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Who, then, is ever Alone.</hi>&mdash;The faint-hearted
wretch does not know what it means to be
lonely. An enemy is always prowling in his tracks.
Oh, for the man who could give us the history of
that subtle feeling called loneliness!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>250.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Night and Music.</hi>&mdash;It was only at night time,
and in the semi-obscurity of dark forests and
caverns, that the ear, the organ of fear, was able to
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
develop itself so well, in accordance with the mode
of living of the timid&mdash;that is, the longest human
epoch which has ever yet existed: when it is clear daylight
the ear is less necessary. Hence the character
of music, which is an art of night and twilight.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>251.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Stoical.</hi>&mdash;The Stoic experiences a certain sense
of cheerfulness when he feels oppressed by the
ceremonial which he has prescribed for himself:
he enjoys himself then as a ruler.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>252.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Consider.</hi>&mdash;The man who is being punished is
no longer he who has done the deed. He is always
the scapegoat.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>253.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Appearance.</hi>&mdash;Alas! what must be best and
most resolutely proved is appearance itself; for
only too many people lack eyes to observe it.
But it is so tiresome!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>254.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Those who Anticipate.</hi>&mdash;What distinguishes
poetic natures, but is also a danger for them, is their
imagination, which exhausts itself in advance:
which anticipates what will happen or what may
happen, which enjoys and suffers in advance, and
which at the final moment of the event or the action
is already fatigued. Lord Byron, who was only
too familiar with this, wrote in his diary: <q>If ever
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
I have a son he shall choose a very prosaic profession&mdash;that
of a lawyer or a pirate.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>255.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Conversation on Music.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> What do you say to that music?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> It has overpowered me, I can say nothing
about it. Listen! there it is beginning again.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> All the better! This time let us do our best
to overpower it. Will you allow me to add a few
words to this music? and also to show you a drama
which perhaps at your first hearing you did not wish
to observe?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Very well, I have two ears and even more if
necessary; move up closer to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> We have not yet heard what he wishes to
say to us, up to the present he has only promised
to say something&mdash;something as yet unheard, so he
gives us to understand by his gestures, for they are
gestures. How he beckons! How he raises himself
up! How he gesticulates! and now the moment
of supreme tension seems to have come to him:
two more fanfares, and he will present us with his
superb and splendidly-adorned theme, rattling, as
it were, with precious stones.
</p>

<p>
Is it a handsome woman? or a beautiful horse?
Enough, he looks about him as if enraptured, for
he must assemble looks of rapture. It is only now
that his theme quite pleases him: it is only now
that he becomes inventive and risks new and
audacious features. How he forces out his theme!
Ah, take care!&mdash;he not only understands how to
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
adorn, but also how to gloss it over! Yes, he knows
what the colour of health is, and he knows how to
make it up,&mdash;he is more subtle in his self-consciousness
than I thought. And now he is convinced that
he has convinced his hearers; he sets off his impromptus
as if they were the most important things
under the sun: he points to his theme with an
insolent finger as if it were too good for this world.&mdash;Ah,
how distrustful he is! He is afraid we may
get tired!&mdash;that is why he buries his melody in
sweet notes.&mdash;Now he even appeals to our coarser
senses that he may excite us and thus get us once
again into his power. Listen to him as he conjures
up the elementary force of tempestuous and
thundering rhythms!
</p>

<p>
And now that he sees that these things have
captivated our attention, strangle us, and almost
overwhelm us, he once again ventures to introduce
his theme amidst this play of the elements in order
to convince us, confused and agitated as we are, that
our confusion and agitation are the effects of his
miraculous theme. And from now onwards his
hearers believe in him: as soon as the theme is
heard once more they are reminded of its thrilling
elementary effects. The theme profits by this recollection&mdash;now
it has become demoniacal! What
a connoisseur of the soul he is! He gains command
over us by all the artifices of the popular orator.
But the music has stopped again.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> And I am glad of it; for I could no longer
bear listening to your observations! I should prefer
ten times over to let myself be deceived to knowing
the truth once after your version.
</p>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> That is just what I wished to hear from you.
The best people now are just like you: you are
quite content to let yourselves be deceived. You
come here with coarse, lustful ears, and you do not
bring with you your conscience of the art of listening.
On the way here you have cast away your
intellectual honesty, and thus you corrupt both art
and artists. Whenever you applaud and cheer
you have in your hands the conscience of the
artists&mdash;and woe to art if they get to know
that you cannot distinguish between innocent and
guilty music! I do not indeed refer to <q>good</q>
and <q>bad</q> music&mdash;we meet with both in the two
kinds of music mentioned! but I call innocent
music that which thinks only of itself and believes
only in itself, and which on account of itself
has forgotten the world at large&mdash;this spontaneous
expression of the most profound solitude which
speaks of itself and with itself, and has entirely forgotten
that there are listeners, effects, misunderstandings
and failures in the world outside. In
short, the music which we have just heard is precisely
of this rare and noble type; and everything
I said about it was a fable&mdash;pardon my little trick
if you will!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Oh, then you like <emph>this</emph> music, too? In that
case many sins shall be forgiven you!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>256.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Happiness of the Evil Ones.</hi>&mdash;These
silent, gloomy, and evil men possess a peculiar something
which you cannot dispute with them&mdash;an
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
uncommon and strange enjoyment in the <foreign rend='italic'>dolce far
niente</foreign>; a sunset and evening rest, such as none can
enjoy but a heart which has been too often devoured,
lacerated, and poisoned by the passions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>257.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words Present in our Minds.</hi>&mdash;We always
express our thoughts with those words which lie
nearest to hand. Or rather, if I may reveal my
full suspicion; at every moment we have only the
particular thought for the words that are present in
our minds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>258.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flattering the Dog.</hi>&mdash;You have only to
stroke this dog's coat once, and he immediately
splutters and gives off sparks like any other flatterer&mdash;and
he is witty in his own way. Why should
we not endure him thus?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>259.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Quondam Panegyrist.</hi>&mdash;<q>He has now
become silent now in regard to me, although he
knows the truth and could tell it; but it would sound
like vengeance&mdash;and he values truth so highly, this
honourable man!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>260.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Amulet of Dependent Men.</hi>&mdash;He who
is unavoidably dependent upon some master ought to
possess something by which he can inspire his master
with fear, and keep him in check: integrity, for
example, or probity, or an evil tongue.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<div>
<head>261.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Why so Sublime!</hi>&mdash;Oh, I know them well this
breed of animals! Certainly it pleases them better
to walk on two legs <q>like a god</q>&mdash;but it pleases
me better when they fall back on their four feet.
This is incomparably more natural for them!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>262.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Demon of Power.</hi>&mdash;Neither necessity
nor desire, but the love of power, is the demon of
mankind. You may give men everything possible&mdash;health,
food, shelter, enjoyment&mdash;but they are and
remain unhappy and capricious, for the demon waits
and waits; and must be satisfied. Let everything
else be taken away from men, and let this demon
be satisfied, and then they will nearly be happy&mdash;as
happy as men and demons can be; but why do I
repeat this? Luther has already said it, and better
than I have done, in the verses:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>And though they take our life,</q></l>
<l>Goods, honour, children, wife,</l>
<l>Yet is their profit small,</l>
<l>These things shall vanish all,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>The Kingdom it remaineth.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The Kingdom! there it is again!<note place='foot'>A hit at the German Empire, which Nietzsche always
despised, since it led to the utter extinction of the old German
spirit. <q>Kingdom</q> (in <q>Kingdom of God</q>) and <q>Empire</q>
are both represented by the one German word <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Reich</foreign>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>263.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Contradiction Incarnate and Animated.</hi>&mdash;There
is a physiological contradiction in what is
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
called genius: genius possesses on the one hand a
great deal of savage disorder and involuntary movement,
and on the other hand a great deal of superior
activity in this movement. Joined to this a genius
possesses a mirror which reflects the two movements
beside one another, and within one another, but
often opposed to one another. Genius in consequence
of this sight is often unhappy, and if it feels
its greatest happiness in creating, it is because it forgets
that precisely then, with the highest determinate
activity, it does something fantastic and irrational
(such is all art) and cannot help doing it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>264.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Deceiving One's Self.</hi>&mdash;Envious men with a
discriminating intuition endeavour not to become
too closely acquainted with their rivals in order that
they may feel themselves superior to them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>265.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>There is a Time for the Theatre.</hi>&mdash;When
the imagination of a people begins to diminish, there
arises the desire to have its legends represented on
the stage: it then tolerates the coarse substitutes
for imagination. In the age of the epic rhapsodist,
however, the theatre itself, and the actor dressed
up as a hero, form an obstacle in the path of the
imagination instead of acting as wings for it&mdash;too
near, too definite, too heavy, and with too
little of dreamland and the flights of birds about
them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<div>
<head>266.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Without Charm.</hi>&mdash;He lacks charm and knows
it. Ah, how skilful he is in masking this defect!
He does it by a strict virtue, gloomy looks, and
acquired distrust of all men, and of existence itself;
by coarse jests, by contempt for a more refined
manner of living, by pathos and pretensions, and by
a cynical philosophy&mdash;yea, he has even developed
into a character through the continual knowledge
of his deficiency.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>267.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Why so Proud?</hi>&mdash;A noble character is distinguished
from a vulgar one by the fact that the latter
has not at ready command a certain number of
habits and points of view like the former: fate willed
that they should not be his either by inheritance or
by education.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>268.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Orator's Scylla and Charybdis.</hi>&mdash;How
difficult it was in Athens to speak in such a
way as to win over the hearers to one's cause without
repelling them at the same time by the form in
which one's speech was cast, or withdrawing their
attention from the cause itself by this form! How
difficult it still is to write thus in France!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>269.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sick People and Art.</hi>&mdash;For all kinds of sadness
and misery of soul we should first of all try
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
a change of diet and severe manual labour; but in
such cases men are in the habit of having recourse
to mental intoxicants, to art for example&mdash;which is
both to their own detriment and that of art! Can
you not see that when you call for art as sick people
you make the artists themselves sick?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>270.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Apparent Toleration.</hi>&mdash;Those are good,
benevolent, and rational words on and in favour of
science, but, alas! I see behind these words your
toleration of science. In a corner of your inmost
mind you think, in spite of all you say, that <emph>it is
not necessary for you</emph>, that it shows magnanimity on
your part to admit and even to advocate it, more
especially as science on its part does not exhibit
this magnanimity in regard to your opinion! Do
you know that you have no right whatever to exercise
this toleration? that this condescension of yours
is an even coarser disparagement of science than
any of that open scorn which a presumptuous priest
or artist might allow himself to indulge in towards
science? What is lacking in you is a strong sense
for everything that is true and actual, you do not
feel grieved and worried to find that science is in
contradiction to your own sentiments, you are unacquainted
with that intense desire for knowledge
ruling over you like a law, you do not feel a duty
in the need of being present with your own eyes
wherever knowledge exists, and to let nothing that
is <q>known</q> escape you. You do not know that
which you are treating with such toleration! and
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
it is only because you do not know it that you can
succeed in adopting such a gracious attitude towards
it. You, forsooth, would look upon science with
hatred and fanaticism if it for once cast its shining
and illuminating glance upon you! What does it
matter to us, then, if you do exhibit toleration&mdash;and
towards a phantom! and not even towards us!&mdash;and
what do we matter!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>271.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Festive Moods.</hi>&mdash;It is exactly those men who
aspire most ardently towards power who feel it indescribably
agreeable to be overpowered! to sink
suddenly and deeply into a feeling as into a whirlpool!
To suffer the reins to be snatched out of
their hand, and to watch a movement which takes
them they know not where! Whatever or whoever
may be the person or thing that renders us
this service, it is nevertheless a great service: we
are so happy and breathless, and feel around us
an exceptional silence, as if we were in the most
central bowels of the earth. To be for once entirely
powerless! the plaything of the elementary forces
of nature! There is a restfulness in this happiness,
a casting away of the great burden, a descent
without fatigue, as if one had been given up to the
blind force of gravity.
</p>

<p>
This is the dream of the mountain climber, who,
although he sees his goal far above him, nevertheless
falls asleep on the way from utter exhaustion,
and dreams of the happiness of the contrast&mdash;this
effortless rolling down hill. I describe happiness
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
as I imagine it to be in our present-day society,
the badgered, ambitious society of Europe and
America. Now and then they <emph>wish</emph> to fall back
into impotence&mdash;this enjoyment is offered them
by wars, arts, religions, and geniuses. When a man
has temporarily abandoned himself to a momentary
impression which devours and crushes everything&mdash;and
this is the modern festive mood&mdash;he
afterwards becomes freer, colder, more refreshed,
and more strict, and again strives tirelessly after
the contrary of all this: power.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_272'/>
<head>272.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Purification of Races.</hi>&mdash;It is probable
that there are no pure races, but only races which
have become purified, and even these are extremely
rare.<note place='foot'>This sentence is a complete refutation of a book which
caused so much stir in Germany about a decade ago, and in
England quite recently, Chamberlain's <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Century</hi>,
in which a purely imaginary Teutonic race is held up as
the Chosen People of the world. Nietzsche says elsewhere,
<q>Peoples and Countries,</q> aphorism 21, <q>Associate with no
man who takes part in the mendacious race-swindle.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note> We more often meet with crossed races,
among whom, together with the defects in the harmony
of the bodily forms (for example when the
eyes do not accord with the mouth) we necessarily
always find defects of harmony in habits and appreciations.
(Livingstone heard some one say, <q>God
created white and black men, but the devil created
the half-castes.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Crossed races are always at the same time crossed
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
cultures and crossed moralities: they are, as a rule,
more evil, cruel, and restless. Purity is the final
result of innumerable adjustments, absorptions, and
eliminations; and progress towards purity in a race
is shown by the fact that the latent strength in the
race is more and more restricted to a few special
functions, whilst it formerly had to carry out too
many and often contradictory things. Such a restriction
will always have the appearance of an
impoverishment, and must be judged with prudence
and moderation. In the long run, however, when the
process of purification has come to a successful termination,
all those forces which were formerly wasted
in the struggle between the disharmonious qualities
are at the disposal of the organism as a whole, and this
is why purified races have always become stronger
and more beautiful.&mdash;The Greeks may serve us as
a model of a purified race and culture!&mdash;and it is
to be hoped that some day a pure European race
and culture may arise.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>273.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Praise.</hi>&mdash;Here is some one who, you perceive,
wishes to praise you: you bite your lips
and brace up your heart: Oh, that <emph>that</emph> cup
might go hence! But it does not, it comes!
let us therefore drink the sweet impudence of the
panegyrist, let us overcome the disgust and profound
contempt that we feel for the innermost
substance of his praise, let us assume a look of
thankful joy&mdash;for he wished to make himself agreeable
to us! And now that it is all over we know
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
that he feels greatly exalted; he has been victorious
over us. Yes, and also over himself, the villain!&mdash;for
it was no easy matter for him to wring this
praise from himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>274.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Rights and Privileges of Man.</hi>&mdash;We
human beings are the only creatures who, when
things do not go well with us, can blot ourselves
out like a clumsy sentence,&mdash;whether we do so out
of honour for humanity or pity for it, or on account
of the aversion we feel towards ourselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>275.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Transformed Being.</hi>&mdash;Now he becomes
virtuous; but only for the sake of hurting others
by being so. Don't pay so much attention to him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>276.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How Often! How Unexpected!</hi>&mdash;How may
married men have some morning awakened to the
fact that their young wife is dull, although she
thinks quite the contrary! not to speak of those
wives whose flesh is willing but whose intellect
is weak!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>277.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Warm and Cold Virtues.</hi>&mdash;Courage is sometimes
the consequence of cold and unshaken resolution,
and at other times of a fiery and reckless
élan. For these two kinds of courage there is only
the one name!&mdash;but how different, nevertheless,
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
are cold virtues and warm virtues! and the man
would be a fool who could suppose that <q>goodness</q>
could only be brought about by warmth,
and no less a fool he who would only attribute it
to cold. The truth is that mankind has found
both warm and cold courage very useful, yet not
often enough to prevent it from setting them both
in the category of precious stones.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>278.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The gracious Memory.</hi>&mdash;A man of high rank
will do well to develop a gracious memory, that
is, to note all the good qualities of people and remember
them particularly; for in this way he holds
them in an agreeable dependence. A man may also
act in this way towards himself: whether or not he
has a gracious memory determines in the end the
superiority, gentleness, or distrust with which he observes
his own inclinations and intentions, and finally
even the nature of these inclinations and intentions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>279.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wherein we become Artists.</hi>&mdash;He who
makes an idol of some one endeavours to justify
himself in his own eyes by idealising this person:
in other words, he becomes an artist that he may
have a clear conscience. When he suffers he does
not suffer from his ignorance, but from the lie he
has told himself to make himself ignorant. The
inmost misery and desire of such a man&mdash;and all
passionate lovers are included in this category&mdash;cannot
be exhausted by normal means.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<div>
<head>280.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Childlike.</hi>&mdash;Those who live like children&mdash;those
who have not to struggle for their daily
bread, and do not think that their actions have
any ultimate signification&mdash;remain childlike.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>281.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Ego desires Everything.</hi>&mdash;It would
seem as if men in general were only inspired by the
desire to possess: languages at least would permit
of this supposition, for they view past actions from
the standpoint that we have been put in possession
of something&mdash;<q>I <emph>have</emph> spoken, struggled, conquered</q>&mdash;as
if to say, I am now in possession of
my word, my struggle, my victory. How greedy
man appears in this light! he cannot even let the
past escape him: he even wishes to <emph>have</emph> it still!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>282.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Danger in Beauty.</hi>&mdash;This woman is beautiful
and intelligent: alas, how much more intelligent she
would have become if she had not been beautiful!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>283.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Domestic and Mental Peace.</hi>&mdash;Our habitual
mood depends upon the mood in which we maintain
our habitual entourage.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>284.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>New Things as Old Ones.</hi>&mdash;Many people
seem irritated when something new is told them:
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
they feel the ascendancy which the news has given
to the person who has learnt it first.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>285.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What are the Limits of the Ego.</hi>&mdash;The
majority of people take under their protection, as
it were, something that they know, as if the fact
of knowing it was sufficient in itself to make it
their property. The acquisitiveness of the egoistic
feeling has no limits: Great men speak as if they
had behind them the whole of time, and had
placed themselves at the head of this enormous
host; and good women boast of the beauty of their
children, their clothes, their dog, their physician,
or their native town, but the only thing they dare
not say is, <q>I am all that.</q> <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chi non ha non è</foreign>&mdash;as
they say in Italy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>286.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Domestic Animals, Pets and the Like.</hi>&mdash;Could
there be anything more repugnant than the
sentimentality which is shown to plants and animals&mdash;and
this on the part of a creature who from the
very beginning has made such ravages among
them as their most ferocious enemy,&mdash;and who
ends by even claiming affectionate feelings from his
weakened and mutilated victims! Before this kind
of <q>nature</q> man must above all be serious, if he
is any sort of a thinking being.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>287.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Two Friends.</hi>&mdash;They were friends once, but
now they have ceased to be so, and both of them
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
broke off the friendship at the same time, the one
because he believed himself to be too greatly misunderstood,
and the other because he thought he
was known too intimately&mdash;and both were wrong!
For neither of them knew himself well enough.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>288.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Comedy of the Noble Souls.</hi>&mdash;Those
who cannot succeed in exhibiting a noble and cordial
familiarity endeavour to let the nobleness of their
nature be seen by their exercise of reserve and
strictness, and a certain contempt for familiarity,
as if their strong sense of confidence were ashamed
to show itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>289.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where we may say Nothing against
Virtue.</hi>&mdash;Among cowards it is thought bad form
to say anything against bravery, for any expression
of this kind would give rise to some contempt;
and unfeeling people are irritated when anything
is said against pity.<note place='foot'>The fiercest protests against Nietzsche's teaching even
now come from the <q>unfeeling people.</q> Hence the difficulty&mdash;now
happily past&mdash;of introducing him into Anglo-Saxon
countries.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>290.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Waste.</hi>&mdash;We find that with irritable and
abrupt people their first words and actions generally
afford no indication of their actual character&mdash;they
are prompted by circumstances, and are to some
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
extent simply reproductions of the spirit of these
circumstances. Because, however, as the words
have been uttered and the deeds done, the subsequent
words and deeds, indicating the real nature of such
people, have often to be used to reconcile, amend,
or extinguish the former.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>291.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arrogance.</hi>&mdash;Arrogance is an artificial and
simulated pride; but it is precisely the essential
nature of pride to be incapable of artifice, simulation,
or hypocrisy&mdash;and thus arrogance is the
hypocrisy of the incapacity for hypocrisy, a very
difficult thing, and one which is a failure in most
cases. But if we suppose that, as most frequently
happens, the presumptuous person betrays himself,
then a treble annoyance falls to his lot: people
are angry with him because he has endeavoured to
deceive them, and because he wished to show himself
superior to them, and finally they laugh at him
because he failed in both these endeavours. How
earnestly, therefore, should we dissuade our fellow-men
from arrogance!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>292.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Species of Misconception.</hi>&mdash;When we hear
somebody speak it is often sufficient for his pronunciation
of a single consonant (the letter r, for
example) to fill us with doubts as to the honesty
of his feelings: we are not accustomed to this
particular pronunciation, and should have to make
it ourselves as it were arbitrarily&mdash;it sounds <q>forced</q>
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
to us. This is the domain of the greatest possible
misconception: and it is the same with the style
of a writer who has certain habits which are not the
habits of everybody. His <q>artlessness</q> is felt as
such only by himself, and precisely in regard to that
which he himself feels to be <q>forced</q> (because he
has yielded in this matter to the prevailing fashion
and to so called <q>good taste</q>), he may perhaps
give pleasure and inspire confidence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>293.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thankful.</hi>&mdash;One superfluous grain of gratitude
and piety makes one suffer as from a vice&mdash;in
spite of all one's independence and honesty one
begins to have a bad conscience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>294.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saints.</hi>&mdash;It is the most sensual men who find
it necessary to avoid women and to torture their
bodies.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>295.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Subtlety of Serving.</hi>&mdash;One of the most
subtle tasks in the great art of serving is that of
serving a more than usually ambitious man, who,
indeed, is excessively egoistic in all things, but is
entirely adverse to being thought so (this is part
of his ambition). He requires that everything shall
be according to his own will and humour, yet in
such a way as to give him the appearance of always
having sacrificed himself, and of rarely desiring
anything for himself alone.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<div>
<head>296.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Duelling.</hi>&mdash;I think it a great advantage, said
some one, to be able to fight a duel&mdash;if, of course,
it is absolutely necessary; for I have at all times
brave companions about me. The duel is the last
means of thoroughly honourable suicide left to us;
but it is unfortunately a circuitous means, and not
even a certain one.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>297.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pernicious.</hi>&mdash;A young man can be most surely
corrupted when he is taught to value the like-minded
more highly than the differently minded.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>298.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hero-Worship and its Fanatics.</hi>&mdash;The
fanatic of an ideal that possesses flesh and blood
is right as a rule so long as he assumes a negative
attitude, and he is terrible in his negation: he
knows what he denies as well as he knows himself,
for the simple reason that he comes thence, that he
feels at home there, and that he has always the
secret fear of being forced to return there some
day. He therefore wishes to make his return impossible
by the manner of his negation. As soon
as he begins to affirm, however, he partly shuts his
eyes and begins to idealise (frequently merely for
the sake of annoying those who have stayed at
home). We might say that there was something
artistic about this&mdash;agreed, but there is also something
dishonest about it.
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
The idealist of a person imagines this person to
be so far from him that he can no longer see him
distinctly, and then he travesties that which he can
just perceive into something <q>beautiful</q>&mdash;that is
to say, symmetrical, vaguely outlined, uncertain.
Since he wishes to worship from afar that ideal
which floats on high in the distance, he finds
it essential to build a temple for the object of
his worship as a protection from the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>profanum
vulgus</foreign>. He brings into this temple for the object
of his worship all the venerable and sanctified objects
which he still possesses, so that his ideal may benefit
by their charm, and that, nourished in this way, it
may grow more and more divine. In the end he
really succeeds in forming his God, but, alas for
him! there is some one who knows how all this
has been done, viz. his intellectual conscience; and
there is also some one who, quite unconsciously,
begins to protest against these things, viz. the
deified one himself, who, in consequence of all this
worship, praise, and incense, now becomes completely
unbearable and shows himself in the most
obvious and dreadful manner to be non-divine, and
only too human.
</p>

<p>
In a case like this there is only one means of
escape left for such a fanatic; he patiently suffers
himself and his fellows to be maltreated, and interprets
all this misery <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in maiorem dei gloriam</foreign> by a
new kind of self-deceit and noble falsehood. He
takes up a stand against himself, and in doing so
experiences, as an interpreter and ill-treated person,
something like martyrdom&mdash;and in this way he
climbs to the height of his conceit. Men of this
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
kind to be found, for example, in the entourage of
Napoleon: indeed, perhaps it may have been he who
inspired the soul of his century with that romantic
prostration in the presence of the <q>genius</q> and the
<q>hero,</q> which was so foreign to the spirit of rationalism
of the nineteenth century&mdash;a man about whom
even Byron was not ashamed to say that he was
a <q>worm compared with such a being.</q> (The
formulæ of this prostration have been discovered by
Thomas Carlyle, that arrogant old muddle-head and
grumbler, who spent his long life in trying to romanticise
the common sense of his Englishmen:
but in vain!)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>299.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Appearance of Heroism.</hi>&mdash;Throwing
ourselves in the midst of our enemies may be a
sign of cowardice.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>300.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Condescending towards the Flatterer.</hi>&mdash;It
is the ultimate prudence of insatiably ambitious
men not only to conceal their contempt for
man which the sight of flatterers causes them: but
also to appear even condescending to them, like a
God who can be nothing if not condescending.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>301.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Strength of Character.</q></hi>&mdash;<q>What I have
said once I will do</q>&mdash;This manner of thinking is
believed to indicate great strength of character.
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
How many actions are accomplished, not because
they have been selected as being the most rational,
but because at the moment when we thought of
them they influenced our ambition and vanity by
some means or another, so that we do not stop
until we have blindly carried them out. Thus they
strengthen in us our belief in our character and
our good conscience, in short our strength; whilst
the choice of the most rational acts possible brings
about a certain amount of scepticism towards ourselves,
and thus encourages a sense of weakness in us.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>302.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Once, Twice, and Thrice True.</hi>&mdash;Men lie
unspeakably and often, but they do not think about
it afterwards, and generally do not believe in it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>303.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Pastime of the Psychologist.</hi>&mdash;He
thinks he knows me, and fancies himself to be
subtle and important when he has any kind of relations
with me; and I take care not to undeceive
him. For in such a case I should suffer for it,
while now he wishes me well because I arouse
in him a feeling of conscious superiority.&mdash;There
is another, who fears that I think I know him,
and feels a sense of inferiority at this. As a
result he behaves in a timid and vacillating manner,
in my presence, and endeavours to mislead me
in regard to himself so that he may regain an
ascendancy over me.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<div>
<head>304.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Destroyers of the World.</hi>&mdash;When
some men fail to accomplish what they desire to
do they exclaim angrily, <q>May the whole world
perish!</q> This odious feeling is the height of envy
which reasons thus: because I cannot have one
thing the whole world in general must have nothing!
the whole world shall not exist!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>305.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Greed.</hi>&mdash;When we set out to buy something our
greed increases with the cheapness of the object&mdash;Why?
Is it because the small differences in price
make up the little eye of greed?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>306.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Greek Ideal.</hi>&mdash;What did the Greeks admire
in Ulysses? Above all his capacity for lying
and for taking a shrewd and dreadful revenge, his
being equal to circumstances, his appearing to
be nobler than the noblest when necessary, his
ability to be everything he desired, his heroic
pertinacity, having all means within his command,
possessing genius&mdash;the genius of Ulysses is an
object of the admiration of the gods, they smile
when they think of it&mdash;all this is the Greek ideal!
What is most remarkable about it is that the contradiction
between seeming and being was not felt
in any way, and that as a consequence it could not
be morally estimated. Were there ever such accomplished
actors?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<div>
<head>307.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Facta! Yes, Facta Ficta!</hi>&mdash;The historian
need not concern himself with events which have
actually happened, but only those which are
supposed to have happened; for none but the latter
have produced an effect. The same remark applies
to the imaginary heroes. His theme&mdash;this so-called
world-history&mdash;what is it but opinions on imaginary
actions and their imaginary motives, which
in their turn give rise to opinions and actions
the reality of which, however, is at once evaporated,
and is only effective as vapour,&mdash;a continual generating
and impregnating of phantoms above the
dense mists of unfathomable reality. All historians
record things which have never existed, except in
imagination.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>308.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not to understand Trade is Noble.</hi>&mdash;To
sell one's virtue only at the highest price, or
even to carry on usury with it as a teacher, a
civil servant, or an artist, for instance, brings genius
and talent down to the level of the common tradesman.
We must be careful not to be clever with
our wisdom!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>309.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Fear and Love.</hi>&mdash;The general knowledge of
mankind has been furthered to a greater extent by
fear than by love; for fear endeavours to find out
who the other is, what he can do, and what he
wants: it would be dangerous and prejudicial to
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
be deceived on this point. On the other hand,
love is induced by its secret craving to discover
as many beautiful qualities as possible in the
loved object, or to raise this loved object as
high as possible: it is a joy and an advantage
to love to be deceived in this way&mdash;and this is
why it does it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>310.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Good-natured People.</hi>&mdash;Good-natured people
have acquired their character from the continual fear
of foreign attacks in which their ancestors lived,&mdash;these
ancestors, who were in the habit of mitigating
and tranquillising, humbling themselves, preventing,
distracting, flattering, and apologising, concealing
their grief and anger, and preserving an unruffled
countenance,&mdash;and they ultimately bequeathed all
this delicate and well-formed mechanism to their
children and grandchildren. These latter, thanks
to their more favourable lot, did not experience this
feeling of dread, but they nevertheless continue in
the same groove.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>311.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The so-called Soul.</hi>&mdash;The sum-total of those
internal movements which come naturally to men,
and which they can consequently set in motion
readily and gracefully, is called the soul&mdash;men are
looked upon as void of soul when they let it be
seen that their inward emotions are difficult and
painful to them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>

<div>
<head>312.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Forgetful Ones.</hi>&mdash;In outbursts of
passion and the delusions of dreams and madness,
man rediscovers his own primitive history, and that
of humanity: animality and its savage grimaces.
For once his memory stretches back into the past,
while his civilised condition is developed from the
forgetfulness of these primitive experiences, that is
to say, from the failing of this memory. He who,
as a forgetful man of a higher nature, has always
remained aloof from these things, does not understand
men&mdash;but it is an advantage if from time
to time there are individuals who do not understand
men, individuals who are, so to speak, created
from the divine seed and born of reason.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>313.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Friend whom we want no Longer.</hi>&mdash;That
friend whose hopes we cannot satisfy we
should prefer to have as an enemy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>314.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>In the Society of Thinkers.</hi>&mdash;In the midst
of the ocean of becoming we adventurers and birds
of passage wake up on an island no larger than a
small boat, and here we look round us for a moment
with as much haste and curiosity as possible; for
how quickly may some gale blow us away or some
wave sweep over the little island and leave nothing
of us remaining! Here, however, upon this little
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
piece of ground we meet with other birds of passage
and hear of still earlier ones,&mdash;and thus we live
together for one precious minute of recognition and
divining, amid the cheerful fluttering of wings
and joyful chirping, and then adventure in spirit
far out on the ocean, feeling no less proud than the
ocean itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>315.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Parting with Something.</hi>&mdash;To give up some
of our property, or to waive a right, gives pleasure
when it denotes great wealth. Generosity may be
placed in this category.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>316.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Weak Sects.</hi>&mdash;Those sects which feel that they
will always remain weak hunt up a few intelligent
individual adherents, wishing to make up in quality
what they lack in quantity. This gives rise to no
little danger for intelligent minds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>317.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Judgment of the Evening.</hi>&mdash;The man
who meditates upon his day's and life's work when
he has reached the end of his journey and feels
weary, generally arrives at a melancholy conclusion;
but this is not the fault of the day or his life, but
of weariness.&mdash;In the midst of creative work we do
not take time, as a rule, to meditate upon life and
existence, nor yet in the midst of our pleasures:
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
but if by a chance this did happen once we should
no longer believe him to be right who waited for
the seventh day and for repose to find everything
that exists very beautiful.&mdash;He had missed the
right moment.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>318.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beware of Systemisers!</hi>&mdash;There is a certain
amount of comedy about systemisers: in trying to
complete a system and to round off its horizon they
have to try to let their weaker qualities appear in
the same style as their stronger ones.&mdash;They wish
to represent complete and uniformly strong natures.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>319.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hospitality.</hi>&mdash;The object of hospitality is to
paralyse all hostile feeling in a stranger. When
we cease to look upon strangers as enemies,
hospitality diminishes; it flourishes so long as its
evil presupposition does.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>320.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Weather.</hi>&mdash;An exceptional and uncertain
state of the weather makes men suspicious even of
one another: at the same time they come to like
innovations, for they must diverge from their accustomed
habits. This is why despots like those
countries where the weather is moral.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>321.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Danger in Innocence.</hi>&mdash;Innocent people
become easy victims in all circumstances because
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
their lack of knowledge prevents them from distinguishing
between moderation and excess, and
from being betimes on their guard against themselves.
It is as a result of this that innocent, that
is, ignorant young women become accustomed to
the frequent enjoyment of sexual intercourse, and
feel the want of it very much in later years when
their husbands fall ill or grow prematurely old.
It is on account of this harmless and orthodox
conception, as if frequent sexual intercourse were
right and proper, that they come to experience
a need which afterwards exposes them to the
severest tribulations, and even worse.
</p>

<p>
Considering the matter, however, from a higher
and more general point of view, whoever loves a
man or a thing without knowing him or it, falls
a prey to something which he would not love if
he could see it. In all cases where experience,
precautions, and prudent steps are required, it is the
innocent man who will be most thoroughly corrupted,
for he has to drink with closed eyes the
dregs and most secret poison of everything put
before him. Let us consider the procedure of all
princes, churches, sects, parties, and corporations:
Is not the innocent man always used as the sweetest
bait for the most dangerous and wicked traps?&mdash;just
as Ulysses availed himself of the services of
the innocent Neoptolemos to cheat the old and
infirm anchorite and ogre of Lemnos out of his bow
and arrows. Christianity, with its contempt for
the world, has made ignorance a virtue&mdash;innocence,
perhaps because the most frequent result of this
innocence is precisely, as I have indicated above,
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
guilt, the sense of guilt, and despair: In other words,
a virtue which leads to Heaven by the circuitous
route of Hell; for only then can the gloomy propylæa
of Christian salvation be thrown open, and
only then is the promise of a posthumous second
innocence effective. This is one of the finest inventions
of Christianity!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>322.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Living without a Doctor when Possible.</hi>&mdash;It
seems to me that a sick man lives more carelessly
when he is under medical observation than
when he attends to his own health. In the first
case it suffices for him to obey strictly all his
Doctor's prescriptions; but in the second case he
gives more attention to the ultimate object of these
prescriptions, namely, his health; he observes
much more, and submits himself to a more severe
discipline than the directions of his physician would
compel him to do.
</p>

<p>
All rules have this effect: they distract our
attention from the fundamental aim of the rule, and
make us more thoughtless. But to what heights of
immoderation and destruction would men have
risen if ever they had completely and honestly left
everything to the Godhead as to their physician,
and acted in accordance with the words <q>as God
will</q>!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>323.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Darkening of the Heavens.</hi>&mdash;Do you
know the vengeance of those timid people who
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
behave in society just as if they had stolen their
limbs? The vengeance of the humble, Christian-like
souls who just manage to slink quietly through
the world? The vengeance of those who always
judge hastily, and are as hastily said to be in the
wrong? The vengeance of all classes of drunkards,
for whom the morning is always the most miserable
part of the day? and also of all kinds of
invalids and sick and depressed people who have no
longer the courage to become healthy?
</p>

<p>
The number of these petty vengeful people, and,
even more, the number of their petty acts of revenge,
is incalculable. The air around us is continually
whizzing with the discharged arrows of their
malignity, so that the sun and the sky of their
lives become darkened thereby,&mdash;and, alas! not
only theirs, but more often ours and other men's:
and this is worse than the frequent wounds which
they make on our skins and hearts. Do we not
occasionally deny the existence of the sun and sky
merely because we have not seen them for so long?&mdash;Well
then, solitude! because of this, solitude!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>324.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Psychology of the Actor.</hi>&mdash;It is the
blissful illusion of all great actors to imagine that
the historical personages whom they are representing
were really in the same state of mind as
they themselves are when interpreting them&mdash;but
in this they are very much mistaken. Their powers
of imitation and divination, which they would fain
exhibit as a clairvoyant faculty, penetrate only
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
far enough to explain gestures, accent, and looks,
and in general anything exterior: that is, they can
grasp the shadow of the soul of a great hero, statesman,
or warrior, or of an ambitious, jealous, or
desperate person&mdash;they penetrate fairly near to
the soul, but they never reach the inmost spirit of
the man they are imitating.
</p>

<p>
It would, indeed, be a fine thing to discover that
instead of thinkers, psychologists, or experts we
required nothing but clairvoyant actors to throw
light upon the essence of any condition. Let us
never forget, whenever such pretensions are heard,
that the actor is nothing but an ideal ape&mdash;so much
of an ape is he, indeed, that he is not capable of
believing in the <q>essence</q> or in the <q>essential</q>:
everything becomes for him merely performance,
intonation, attitude, stage, scenery, and public.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>325.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Living and Believing Apart.</hi>&mdash;The means
of becoming the prophet and wonder-worker of
one's age are the same to-day as in former times:
one must live apart, with little knowledge, some
ideas, and a great deal of presumption&mdash;we then
finish by believing that mankind cannot do without
us, because it is clear that we can do without it.
When we are inspired with this belief we find
faith. Finally, a piece of advice to him who
needs it (it was given to Wesley by Boehler,
his spiritual teacher): <q>Preach faith until you
have it; then you will preach it because you
have it!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div>
<head>326.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Knowing our Circumstances.</hi>&mdash;We may
estimate our powers, but not our power. Not only
do circumstances conceal it from us and show it to
us time about, but they even exaggerate or diminish
it. We must consider ourselves as variable
quantities whose productive capacity may in favourable
circumstances reach the greatest possible
heights: we must therefore reflect upon these circumstances,
and spare no pains in studying them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>327.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Fable.</hi>&mdash;The Don Juan of knowledge&mdash;no
philosopher or poet has yet succeeded in discovering
him. He is wanting in love for the things he
recognises, but he possesses wit, a lust for the hunting
after knowledge, and the intrigues in connection
with it, and he finds enjoyment in all these, even up
to the highest and most distant stars of knowledge&mdash;until
at last there is nothing left for him to
pursue but the absolutely injurious side of knowledge,
just as the drunkard who ends by drinking
absinthe and aquafortis. That is why last of all
he feels a longing for hell, for this is the final
knowledge which seduces him. Perhaps even this
would disappoint him, as all things do which one
knows! and then he would have to stand still for
all eternity, a victim to eternal deception, and transformed
into his enemy, the Stony Guest, who longs
for an evening meal of knowledge which will never
more fall to his share! for the whole world of things
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
will not have another mouthful left to offer to these
hungry men.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>328.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What Idealistic Theories Disclose.</hi>&mdash;We
are most certain to find idealistic theories among
unscrupulously practical men; for such men stand
in need of the lustre of these theories for the sake
of their reputation. They adopt them instinctively
without by any means feeling hypocritical in doing
so&mdash;no more hypocritical than Englishmen with
their Christianity and their Sabbath-keeping. On
the other hand, contemplative natures who have to
keep themselves on the guard against all kinds
of fantasies and who dread to be reputed as
enthusiasts, are only to be satisfied with hard
realistic theories: they take possession of them
under the same instinctive compulsion without
thereby losing their honesty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>329.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Calumniators of Cheerfulness.</hi>&mdash;People
who have been deeply wounded by the disappointments
of life look with suspicion upon all
cheerfulness as if it were something childish and
puerile, and revealed a lack of common sense that
moves them to pity and tenderness, such as one
would experience when seeing a dying child caressing
his toys on his death-bed. Such men appear to
see hidden graves under every rose; rejoicings,
tumult, and cheerful music appear to them to be the
voluntary illusions of a man who is dangerously ill
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
and yet wishes to take a momentary draught from
the intoxicating cup of life. But this judgment about
cheerfulness is merely the reflection of the latter on
the dark background of weariness and ill-health: in
itself it is something touching, irrational, and pitiable,
even childlike and puerile, but connected with
that second childhood which follows in the train of
old age, and is the harbinger of death.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>330.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not yet Enough!</hi>&mdash;It is not sufficient to
prove a case, we must also tempt or raise men to
it: hence the wise man must learn to convey his
wisdom; and often in such a manner that it may
sound like foolishness!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>331.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Right and Limits.</hi>&mdash;Asceticism is the proper
mode of thinking for those who must extirpate
their carnal instincts, because these are ferocious
beasts,&mdash;but only for such people!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>332.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Bombastic Style.</hi>&mdash;An artist who does
not wish to put his elevated feelings into a work
and thus unburden himself, but who rather wishes
to impart these feelings of elevation to others, becomes
pompous, and his style becomes the bombastic
style.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<div>
<head>333.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Humanity.</q></hi>&mdash;We do not consider animals as
moral beings. But do you think that animals
consider us as moral beings? An animal which
had the power of speech once said: <q>Humanity is
a prejudice from which we animals at least do not
suffer.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>334.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Charitable Man.</hi>&mdash;The charitable man
gratifies a need of his own inward feelings when
doing good. The stronger this need is the less
does such a man try to put himself in the place
of those who serve the purpose of gratifying his
desire: he becomes indelicate and sometimes even
offensive. (This remark applies to the benevolence
and charity of the Jews, which, as is well known,
is somewhat more effusive than that of other
peoples.)<note place='foot'>The German Jews are well known for their charity, by
means of which they probably wish to prove that they are not
so bad as the Anti-Semites paint them.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>335.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>That Love may be felt as Love.</hi>&mdash;We
must be honest towards ourselves, and must know
ourselves very well indeed, to be able to practise
upon others that humane dissimulation known as
love and kindness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>336.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What are we capable of?</hi>&mdash;A man who had
been tormented all day by his wicked and malicious
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
son slew him in the evening, and then with a sigh
of relief said to the other members of his family:
<q>Well now we can sleep in peace.</q> Who knows
what circumstances might drive us to!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>337.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Natural.</q></hi>&mdash;To be natural, at least in his
deficiencies, is perhaps the last praise that can be
bestowed upon an artificial artist, who is in other
respects theatrical and half genuine. Such a man will
for this very reason boldly parade his deficiencies.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>338.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Conscience-Substitute.</hi>&mdash;One man is another's
conscience: and this is especially important
when the other has none else.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>339.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Transformation of Duties.</hi>&mdash;When
our duties cease to be difficult of accomplishment,
and after long practice become changed into agreeable
delights and needs, then the rights of others
to whom our duties (though now our inclinations)
refer change into something else: that is, they
become the occasion of pleasant feelings for us.
Henceforth the <q>other,</q> by virtue of his rights,
becomes an object of love to us instead of an object
of reverence and awe as formerly. It is our own
pleasure we seek when we recognise and maintain
the extent of his power. When the Quietists
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
no longer felt their Christian faith as a burden, and
experienced their delight only in God, they took the
motto: <q>Do all to the glory of God.</q> Whatever
they performed henceforth in this sense was no
longer a sacrifice, it was as much as to say, <q>Everything
for the sake of our pleasure.</q> To demand that
duty should be always rather burdensome, as Kant
does, is to demand that it shall never develop into
a habit or custom. There is a small residue of
ascetic cruelty in this demand.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>340.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Appearances are against the Historian.</hi>&mdash;It
is a sufficiently demonstrated fact that human
beings come from the womb; nevertheless when
children grow up and stand by the side of their
mother this hypothesis appears very absurd&mdash;all
appearances are against it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>341.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Advantage of Ignorance.</hi>&mdash;Some one
has said that in his childhood he experienced such
a contempt for the caprices and whims of a melancholy
temperament that, until he had grown up
and had become a middle-aged man, he did not
know what his own temperament was like: it was
precisely a melancholy temperament. He declared
that this was the best of all possible kinds of
ignorance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>342.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Do not be deceived!</hi>&mdash;Yes, he examined the
matter from every side and you think him to be a
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
man of profound knowledge. But he only wishes
to lower the price&mdash;he wants to buy it!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>343.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Moral Pretence.</hi>&mdash;You refuse to be dissatisfied
with yourselves or to suffer from yourselves,
and this you call your moral tendency! Very well;
another may perhaps call it your cowardice! One
thing, however, is certain, and that is that you will
never take a trip round the world (and you yourselves
are this world), and you will always remain
in yourselves an accident and a clod on the face
of the earth! Do you fancy that we who hold
different views from you are merely exposing ourselves
out of pure folly to the journey through our
own deserts, swamps, and glaciers, and that we are
voluntarily choosing grief and disgust with ourselves,
like the Stylites?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>344.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Subtlety in Mistakes.</hi>&mdash;If Homer, as they
say, sometimes nodded, he was wiser than all the
artists of sleepless ambition. We must allow
admirers to stop for a time and take breath by
letting them find fault now and then; for nobody
can bear an uninterruptedly brilliant and untiring
excellence&mdash;and instead of doing good such a
master would merely become a taskmaster, whom
we hate while he precedes us.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>345.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Happiness is not an Argument
either Pro or Con.</hi>&mdash;Many men are only capable
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
of a small share of happiness: and it is not an
argument against their wisdom if this wisdom is
unable to afford them a greater degree of happiness,
any more than it is an argument against medical
skill that many people are incurable, and others
always ailing. May every one have the good fortune
to discover the conception of existence which will
enable him to realise <emph>his</emph> greatest share of happiness!
though this will not necessarily prevent his life from
being miserable and not worth envying.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>346.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Enemies of Women.</hi>&mdash;<q>Woman is our
enemy</q>&mdash;The man who speaks to men in this way
exhibits an unbridled lust which not only hates
itself but also its means.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>347.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The School of the Orator.</hi>&mdash;When a man
has kept silence for a whole year he learns to stop
chattering, and to discourse instead. The Pythagoreans
were the best statesmen of their age.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>348.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Feeling of Power.</hi>&mdash;Note the distinction:
the man who wishes to acquire the feeling
of power seizes upon any means, and looks upon
nothing as too petty which can foster this feeling.
He who already possesses power, however, has
grown fastidious and refined in his tastes; few
things can be found to satisfy him.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>

<div>
<head>349.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not so very Important.</hi>&mdash;When we are
present at a death-bed there regularly arises in us
a thought that we immediately suppress from a
false sense of propriety: the thought that the act
of dying is less important than the customary
veneration of it would wish us to believe, and that
the dying man has probably lost in his life things
which were more important than he is now about to
lose by his death. In this case the end is certainly
not the goal.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>350.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The best way to Promise.</hi>&mdash;When a man
makes a promise it is not merely the word that
promises, but what lies unexpressed behind the
word. Words indeed weaken a promise by discharging
and using up a power which forms part of
that power which promises. Therefore shake hands
when making a promise, but put your finger on
your lips&mdash;in this way you will make the safest
promises.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>351.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Generally Misunderstood.</hi>&mdash;In conversation
we sometimes observe people endeavouring
to set a trap in which to catch others&mdash;not out of
evil-mindedness, as one might suppose, but from
delight in their own shrewdness. Others again
prepare a joke so that some one else may utter it,
they tie the knot so that others may undo it: not
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
out of goodwill, as might be supposed, but from
wickedness, and their contempt for coarse intellects.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>352.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Centre.</hi>&mdash;The feeling, <q>I am the centre of the
world,</q> forcibly comes to us when we are unexpectedly
overtaken by disgrace: we then feel as if
we were standing dazed in the midst of a surge, and
dazzled by the glance of one enormous eye which
gazes down upon us from all sides and looks us
through and through.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>353.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Freedom of Speech.</hi>&mdash;<q>The truth must be
told, even if the world should be shivered in
fragments</q>&mdash;so cries the eminent and grandiloquent
Fichte.&mdash;Yes, certainly; but we must have it
first.&mdash;What he really means, however, is that each
man should speak his mind, even if everything were
to be turned upside down. This point, however, is
open to dispute.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>354.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Courage for Suffering.</hi>&mdash;Such as we
now are, we are capable of bearing a tolerable
amount of displeasure, and our stomach is suited
to such indigestible food. If we were deprived
of it, indeed, we should perhaps think the banquet
of life insipid; and if it were not for our willingness
to suffer pain we should have to let too many
pleasures escape us!
</p>

</div>

<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>

<div>
<head>355.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Admirers.</hi>&mdash;The man who admires up to the
point that he would be ready to crucify any one
who did not admire, must be reckoned among the
executioners of his party&mdash;beware of shaking hands
with him, even when he belongs to your own side.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>356.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Effect of Happiness.</hi>&mdash;The first effect of
happiness is the feeling of power, and this feeling
longs to manifest itself, whether towards ourselves
or other men, or towards ideas and imaginary
beings. Its most common modes of manifestation
are making presents, derision, and destruction&mdash;all
three being due to a common fundamental
instinct.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>357.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moral Mosquitoes.</hi>&mdash;Those moralists who are
lacking in the love of knowledge, and who are only
acquainted with the pleasure of giving pain, have
the spirit and tediousness of provincials. Their
pastime, as cruel as it is lamentable, is to observe
their neighbour with the greatest possible closeness,
and, unperceived, to place a pin in such position
that he cannot help pricking himself with it. Such
men have preserved something of the wickedness
of schoolboys, who cannot amuse themselves without
hunting and torturing either the living or the
dead.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<div>
<head>358.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reasons and their Unreason.</hi>&mdash;You feel a
dislike for him, and adduce innumerable reasons for
this dislike, but I only believe in your dislike and
not in your reasons! You flatter yourself by adducing
as a rational conclusion, both to yourself and
to me, that which happens to be merely a matter
of instinct.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>359.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Approving of Something.</hi>&mdash;We approve of
marriage in the first place because we are not yet
acquainted with it, in the second place because
we have accustomed ourselves to it, and in the
third place because we have contracted it&mdash;that is
to say, in most cases. And yet nothing has been
proved thereby in favour of the value of marriage
in general.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>360.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>No Utilitarians.</hi>&mdash;<q>Power which has greatly
suffered both in deed and in thought is better than
powerlessness which only meets with kind treatment</q>&mdash;such
was the Greek way of thinking. In
other words, the feeling of power was prized more
highly by them than any mere utility or fair renown.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>361.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ugly in Appearance.</hi>&mdash;Moderation appears
to itself to be quite beautiful: it is unaware of the
fact that in the eyes of the immoderate it seems
coarse and insipid, and consequently ugly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<div>
<head>362.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Different in Their Hatred.</hi>&mdash;There are
men who do not begin to hate until they feel weak
and tired: in other respects they are fair-minded
and superior. Others only begin to hate when they
see an opportunity for revenge: in other respects
they carefully avoid both secret and open wrath,
and overlook it whenever there is any occasion
for it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>363.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Men of Chance.</hi>&mdash;It is pure hazard which plays
the essential part in every invention, but most men
do not meet with this hazard.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>364.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Choice of Environment.</hi>&mdash;We should beware
of living in an environment where we are neither able
to maintain a dignified silence nor to express our loftier
thoughts, so that only our complaints and needs
and the whole story of our misery are left to be told.
We thus become dissatisfied with ourselves and with
our surroundings, and to the discomfort which brings
about our complaints we add the vexation which
we feel at always being in the position of grumblers.
But we should, on the contrary, live in a place
where we should be ashamed to speak of ourselves
and where it would not be necessary to do so.&mdash;Who,
however, thinks of such things, or of the choice
in such things? We talk about our <q>fate,</q> brace
up our shoulders, and sigh, <q>Unfortunate Atlas that
I am!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<div>
<head>365.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vanity.</hi>&mdash;Vanity is the dread of appearing to be
original. Hence it is a lack of pride, but not necessarily
a lack of originality.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>366.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Criminal's Grief.</hi>&mdash;The criminal who
has been found out does not suffer because of the
crime he has committed, but because of the shame
and annoyance caused him either by some blunder
which he has made or by being deprived of his
habitual element; and keen discernment is necessary
to distinguish such cases. Every one who has
had much experience of prisons and reformatories is
astonished at the rare instances of really genuine
<q>remorse,</q> and still more so at the longing shown
to return to the old wicked and beloved crime.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>367.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Always appearing Happy.</hi>&mdash;When, in the
Greece of the third century, philosophy had become
a matter of public emulation, there were not a
few philosophers who became happy through the
thought that others who lived according to different
principles, and suffered from them, could not
but feel envious of their happiness. They thought
they could refute these other people with their
happiness better than anything else, and to achieve
this object they were content to appear to be
always happy; but, following this practice, they
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
were obliged to become happy in the long run!
This, for example, was the case of the cynics.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>368.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Cause of much Misunderstanding.</hi>&mdash;The
morality of increasing nervous force is joyful
and restless; the morality of diminishing nervous
force, towards evening, or in invalids and old people,
is passive, calm, patient, and melancholy, and not
rarely even gloomy. In accordance with what we
may possess of one or other of these moralities, we
do not understand that which we lack, and we often
interpret it in others as immorality and weakness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>369.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Raising one's self above one's own Lowness.</hi>&mdash;<q>Proud</q>
fellows they are indeed, those who,
in order to establish a sense of their own dignity and
importance, stand in need of other people whom
they may tyrannise and oppress&mdash;those whose
powerlessness and cowardice permits some one to
make sublime and furious gestures in their presence
with impunity, so that they require the baseness of
their surroundings to raise themselves for one short
moment above their own baseness!&mdash;For this purpose
one man requires a dog, another a friend, a
third a wife, a fourth a party, a fifth, again, one very
rarely to be met with, a whole age.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>370.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To what extent the Thinker loves his
Enemy.</hi>&mdash;Make it a rule never to withhold or conceal
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
from yourself anything that may be thought
against your own thoughts. Vow it! This is the
essential requirement of honest thinking. You must
undertake such a campaign against yourself every
day. A victory and a conquered position are no
longer your concern, but that of truth&mdash;and your
defeat also is no longer your concern!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>371.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Evil of Strength.</hi>&mdash;Violence as the
outcome of passion, for example, of rage, must be
understood from the physiological point of view as
an attempt to avoid an imminent fit of suffocation.
Innumerable acts arising from animal spirits and
vented upon others are simply outlets for getting
rid of sudden congestion by a violent muscular
exertion: and perhaps the entire <q>evil of strength</q>
must be considered from this point of view. (This
evil of strength wounds others unintentionally&mdash;it
must find an outlet somewhere; while the evil of
weakness wishes to wound and to see signs of suffering.)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>372.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To the Credit of the Connoisseur.</hi>&mdash;As
soon as some one who is no connoisseur begins to
pose as a judge we should remonstrate, whether
it is a male or female whipper-snapper. Enthusiasm
or delight in a thing or a human being
is not an argument; neither is repugnance or
hatred.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<div>
<head>373.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Treacherous Blame.</hi>&mdash;<q>He has no knowledge
of men</q> means in the mouth of some <q>He
does not know what baseness is</q>; and in the
mouths of others, <q>He does not know the exception
and knows only too well what baseness means.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>374.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Value of Sacrifice.</hi>&mdash;The more the
rights of states and princes are questioned as to their
right to sacrifice the individual (for example, in the
administration of justice, conscription, etc.), the more
will the value of self-sacrifice rise.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>375.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Speaking too distinctly.</hi>&mdash;There are several
reasons why we articulate our words too distinctly:
in the first place, from distrust of ourselves when
using a new and unpractised language; secondly,
when we distrust others on account of their stupidity
or their slowness of comprehension. The same
remark applies to intellectual matters: our communications
are sometimes too distinct, too painful,
because if it were otherwise those to whom we
communicate our ideas would not understand us.
Consequently the perfect and easy style is only
permissible when addressing a perfect audience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>376.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Plenty of Sleep.</hi>&mdash;What can we do to arouse
ourselves when we are weary and tired of our ego?
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
Some recommend the gambling table, others Christianity,
and others again electricity. But the best
remedy, my dear hypochondriac, is, and always will
be, plenty of sleep in both the literal and figurative
sense of the word. Thus another morning will at
length dawn upon us. The knack of worldly wisdom
is to find the proper time for applying this remedy
in both its forms.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>377.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What we may conclude from fantastic
Ideals.</hi>&mdash;Where our deficiencies are, there also is
our enthusiasm. The enthusiastic principle <q>love
your enemies</q> had to be invented by the Jews, the
best haters that ever existed; and the finest glorifications
of chastity have been written by those who
in their youth led dissolute and licentious lives.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>378.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Clean Hands and clean Walls.</hi>&mdash;Do not
paint the picture either of God or the devil on your
walls: for in so doing you will spoil your walls as
well as your surroundings.<note place='foot'>That is, do not speak either of God or the devil. The
German proverb runs: <q>Man soll den Teufel nicht an die
Wand malen, sonst kommt er.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>379.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Probable and Improbable.</hi>&mdash;A woman
secretly loved a man, raised him far above her, and
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
said to herself hundreds of times in her inmost heart,
<q>If a man like that were to love me, I should look
upon it as a condescension before which I should
have to humble myself in the dust.</q>&mdash;And the man
entertained the same feelings towards the woman,
and in his inmost heart he felt the very same
thought. When at last both their tongues were
loosened, and they had communicated their most
secret thoughts to one another, a deep and meditative
silence ensued. Then the woman said in a cold
voice: <q>The thing is quite clear! We are neither
of us that which we loved! If you are what you
say you are, and nothing more, then I have humbled
myself in vain and loved you; the demon misled me
as well as you.</q> This very probable story never
happens&mdash;and why doesn't it?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>380.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tested Advice.</hi>&mdash;Of all the means of consolation
there is none so efficacious for him who has
need of it as the declaration that in his case no
consolation can be given. This implies such a distinction
that the afflicted person will at once raise
his head again.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>381.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Knowing one's <q>Individuality</q>.</hi>&mdash;We too
often forget that in the eyes of strangers who see
us for the first time we are quite different beings
from what we consider ourselves to be&mdash;in most
cases we exhibit nothing more than one particular
characteristic which catches the eye of the stranger,
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
and determines the impression we make on him.
Thus the most peaceful and fair-minded man, if
only he has a big moustache, may, as it were, repose
in the shade of this moustache; for ordinary
eyes will merely see in him the accessory of a big
moustache, that is to say, a military, irascible, and
occasionally violent character, and will act accordingly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>382.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gardeners and Gardens.</hi>&mdash;Wet dreary days,
loneliness, and unkind words give rise within us
to conclusions like fungi; some morning we find
that they have grown up in front of us we know
not whence, and there they scowl at us, sullen and
morose. Woe to the thinker who instead of being
the gardener of his plants, is merely the soil from
which they spring.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>383.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Comedy of Pity.</hi>&mdash;However much we
may feel for an unhappy friend of ours, we always
act with a certain amount of insincerity in his
presence: we refrain from telling him everything
we think, and how we think it, with all the circumspection
of a doctor standing by the bedside of a
patient who is seriously ill.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>384.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Curious Saints.</hi>&mdash;There are pusillanimous
people who have a bad opinion of everything that
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
is best in their works, and who at the same time
interpret and comment upon them badly: but also,
by a kind of revenge, they entertain a bad opinion
of the sympathy of others, and do not believe in
sympathy at all; they are ashamed to appear to
be carried away from themselves, and feel a defiant
comfort in appearing or becoming ridiculous.&mdash;States
of soul like these are to be found in melancholy
artists.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>385.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vain People.</hi>&mdash;We are like shop-windows,
where we ourselves are constantly arranging, concealing,
or setting in the foreground those supposed
qualities which others attribute to us&mdash;in order to
deceive <emph>ourselves</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>386.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pathetic and Naïve.</hi>&mdash;It may be a very
vulgar habit to let no opportunity slip of assuming
a pathetic air for the sake of the enjoyment to be
experienced in imagining the spectator striking his
breast and feeling himself to be small and miserable.
Consequently it may also be the indication of
a noble mind to make fun of pathetic situations,
and to behave in an undignified manner in them.
The old, warlike nobility of France possessed that
kind of distinction and delicacy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>387.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Reflection before Marriage.</hi>&mdash;Supposing
she loved me, what a burden she would be to
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
me in the long run! and supposing that she did
not love me, what a much greater burden she would
be to me in the long run! We have to choose
between two different kinds of burdens; therefore
let us marry.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>388.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rascality with a good Conscience.</hi>&mdash;It is
exceedingly annoying to be cheated in small
bargains in certain countries,&mdash;in the Tyrol, for
example,&mdash;because, in addition to the bad bargain,
we are compelled to accept the evil countenance
and coarse greediness of the man who has cheated
us, together with his bad conscience and his hostile
feeling against us. At Venice, on the other hand,
the cheater is highly delighted at his successful
fraud, and is not in the least angry with the man
he has cheated&mdash;nay, he is even inclined to show
him some kindness, and above all to have a hearty
laugh with him if he likes.&mdash;In short, one must
possess wit and a good conscience in order to be
a knave, and this will almost reconcile the cheated
one with the cheat.<note place='foot'>The case of that other witty Venetian, Casanova.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>389.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rather too Awkward.</hi>&mdash;Good people who
are too awkward to be polite and amiable promptly
endeavour to return an act of politeness by an
important service, or by a contribution beyond their
power. It is touching to see them timidly producing
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
their gold coins when others have offered
them their gilded coppers!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>390.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hiding one's Intelligence.</hi>&mdash;When we surprise
some one in the act of hiding his intelligence
from us we call him evil: the more so if we suspect
that it is his civility and benevolence which
have induced him to do so.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>391.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Evil Moment.</hi>&mdash;Lively dispositions only
lie for a moment: after this they have deceived
themselves, and are convinced and honest.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>392.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Condition of Politeness.</hi>&mdash;Politeness
is a very good thing, and really one of the four
chief virtues (although the last), but in order that
it may not result in our becoming tiresome to one
another the person with whom I have to deal must
be either one degree more or less polite than I&mdash;otherwise
we should never get on, and the ointment
would not only anoint us, but would cement us
together.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>393.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dangerous Virtues.</hi>&mdash;<q>He forgets nothing,
but forgives everything</q>&mdash;wherefore he shall be
doubly detested, for he causes us double shame by
his memory and his magnanimity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<div>
<head>394.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Without Vanity.</hi>&mdash;Passionate people think
little of what others may think; their state of mind
raises them above vanity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>395.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Contemplation.</hi>&mdash;In some thinkers the contemplative
state peculiar to a thinker is always the
consequence of a state of fear, in others always of
desire. In the former, contemplation thus seems
allied to the feeling of security, in the latter to the
feeling of surfeit&mdash;in other words, the former are
spirited in their mood, the latter over-satiated and
neutral.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>396.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hunting.</hi>&mdash;The one is hunting for agreeable
truths, the other for disagreeable ones. But even
the former takes greater pleasure in the hunt than
in the booty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>397.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Education.</hi>&mdash;Education is a continuation of
procreation, and very often a kind of supplementary
varnishing of it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>398.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How to recognise the Choleric.</hi>&mdash;Of two
persons who are struggling together, or who love
and admire one another, the more choleric will
always be at a disadvantage. The same remark
applies to two nations.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<div>
<head>399.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Self-Excuse.</hi>&mdash;Many men have the best
possible right to act in this or that way; but as
soon as they begin to excuse their actions we no
longer believe that they are right&mdash;and we are
mistaken.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>400.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moral Pampering.</hi>&mdash;There are tender, moral
natures who are ashamed of all their successes and
feel remorse after every failure.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>401.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dangerous Unlearning.</hi>&mdash;We begin by unlearning
to love others, and end by finding nothing
lovable in ourselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>402.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Another form of Toleration.</hi>&mdash;<q>To remain
a minute too long on red-hot coals and to be burnt
a little does no harm either to men or to chestnuts.
The slight bitterness and hardness makes the kernel
all the sweeter.</q>&mdash;Yes, this is your opinion, you
who enjoy the taste! You sublime cannibals!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>403.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Different Pride.</hi>&mdash;Women turn pale at the
thought that their lover may not be worthy of them;
Men turn pale at the thought that they may not
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
be worthy of the women they love. I speak of perfect
women, perfect men. Such men, who are self-reliant
and conscious of power at ordinary times, grow
diffident and doubtful of themselves when under
the influence of a strong passion. Such women,
on the other hand, though always looking upon
themselves as the weak and devoted sex, become
proud and conscious of their power in the great
exception of passion,&mdash;they ask: <q>Who then is
worthy of me?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>404.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>When we seldom do Justice.</hi>&mdash;Certain men
are unable to feel enthusiasm for a great and good
cause without committing a great injustice in some
other quarter: this is <emph>their</emph> kind of morality.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>405.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Luxury.</hi>&mdash;The love of luxury is rooted in the
depths of a man's heart: it shows that the superfluous
and immoderate is the sea wherein his soul
prefers to float.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>406.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To Immortalise.</hi>&mdash;Let him who wishes to kill
his opponent first consider whether by doing so he
will not immortalise him in himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>407.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against our Character.</hi>&mdash;If the truth which
we have to utter goes against our character&mdash;as
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
very often happens&mdash;we behave as if we had uttered
a clumsy falsehood, and thus rouse suspicion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>408.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where a great deal of Gentleness is
Needed.</hi>&mdash;Many natures have only the choice of
being either public evil-doers or secret sorrow-bearers.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>409.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Illness.</hi>&mdash;Among illness are to be reckoned the
premature approach of old age, ugliness, and pessimistic
opinions&mdash;three things that always go together.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>410.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Timid People.</hi>&mdash;It is the awkward and timid
people who easily become murderers: they do not
understand slight but sufficient means of defence
or revenge, and their hatred, owing to their lack of
intelligence and presence of mind, can conceive of
no other expedient than destruction.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>411.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Without Hatred.</hi>&mdash;You wish to bid farewell
to your passion? Very well, but do so without
hatred against it! Otherwise you have a second
passion.&mdash;The soul of the Christian who has freed
himself from sin is generally ruined afterwards by
the hatred for sin. Just look at the faces of the
great Christians! they are the faces of great haters.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<div>
<head>412.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ingenious and Narrow-Minded.</hi>&mdash;He can
appreciate nothing beyond himself, and when he
wishes to appreciate other people he must always
begin by transforming them into himself. In this,
however, he is ingenious.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>413.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Private and Public Accusers.</hi>&mdash;Watch
closely the accuser and inquirer,&mdash;for he reveals
his true character; and it is not rare for this to be
a worse character than that of the victim whose
crime he is investigating. The accuser believes in
all innocence that the opponent of a crime and
criminal must be by nature of good character, or
at least must appear as such&mdash;and this is why he
lets himself go, that is to say, he drops his mask.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>414.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Voluntary Blindness.</hi>&mdash;There is a kind of
enthusiastic and extreme devotion to a person or a
party which reveals that in our inmost hearts we feel
ourselves superior to this person or party, and for
this reason we feel indignant with ourselves. We
blind ourselves, as it were, of our own free will to
punish our eyes for having seen too much.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>415.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><foreign rend='italic'>Remedium Amoris.</foreign></hi>&mdash;That old radical remedy
for love is now in most cases as effective as it
always was: love in return.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<div>
<head>416.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where is our worst Enemy?</hi>&mdash;He who can
look after his own affairs well, and knows that he
can do so, is as a rule conciliatory towards his
adversary. But to believe that we have right on
our side, and to know that we are incapable of
defending it&mdash;this gives rise to a fierce and implacable
hatred against the opponent of our cause.
Let every one judge accordingly where his worst
enemies are to be sought.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>417.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Limits of all Humility.</hi>&mdash;Many men
may certainly have attained that humility which
says <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credo quia absurdum est</foreign>, and sacrifices its
reason; but, so far as I know, not one has attained
to that humility which after all is only one step
further, and which says <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>creda quia absurdus sum</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>418.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Acting the Truth.</hi>&mdash;Many a man is truthful,
not because he would be ashamed to exhibit hypocritical
feelings, but because he would not succeed
very well in inducing others to believe in his
hypocrisy. In a word, he has no confidence in
his talent as an actor, and therefore prefers honestly
to act the truth.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>419.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Courage in a Party.</hi>&mdash;The poor sheep say to
their bell-wether: <q>Only lead us, and we shall never
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
lack courage to follow you.</q> But the poor bell-wether
thinks in his heart: <q>Only follow me, and I shall
never lack courage to lead you.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>420.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cunning of the Victim.</hi>&mdash;What a sad cunning
there is in the wish to deceive ourselves with
respect to the person for whom we have sacrificed
ourselves, when we give him an opportunity in which
he must appear to us as we should wish him to be!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>421.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Through Others.</hi>&mdash;There are men who do
not wish to be seen except through the eyes of
others: a wish which implies a great deal of
wisdom.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>422.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Making Others Happy.</hi>&mdash;Why is the fact of
our making others happy more gratifying to us
than all other pleasures?&mdash;Because in so doing
we gratify fifty cravings at one time. Taken
separately they would, perhaps, be very small
pleasures; but when put into one hand, that
hand will be fuller than ever before&mdash;and the heart
also.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book V.</head>

<div>
<head>423.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>In the Great Silence.</hi>&mdash;Here is the sea, here
may we forget the town. It is true that its bells
are still ringing the Angelus&mdash;that solemn and
foolish yet sweet sound at the junction between
day and night,&mdash;but one moment more! now all
is silent. Yonder lies the ocean, pale and brilliant;
it cannot speak. The sky is glistening with its
eternal mute evening hues, red, yellow, and green:
it cannot speak. The small cliffs and rocks which
stretch out into the sea as if each one of them were
endeavouring to find the loneliest spot&mdash;they too
are dumb. Beautiful and awful indeed is this vast
silence, which so suddenly overcomes us and makes
our heart swell.
</p>

<p>
Alas! what deceit lies in this dumb beauty!
How well could it speak, and how evilly, too, if it
wished! Its tongue, tied up and fastened, and its
face of suffering happiness&mdash;all this is but malice,
mocking at your sympathy: be it so! I do not
feel ashamed to be the plaything of such powers!
but I pity thee, oh nature, because thou must be
silent, even though it be only malice that binds
thy tongue: nay, I pity thee for the sake of thy
malice!
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
Alas! the silence deepens, and once again my
heart swells within me: it is startled by a fresh truth&mdash;it,
too, is dumb; it likewise sneers when the mouth
calls out something to this beauty; it also enjoys
the sweet malice of its silence. I come to hate
speaking; yea, even thinking. Behind every word
I utter do I not hear the laughter of error, imagination,
and insanity? Must I not laugh at my pity
and mock my own mockery? Oh sea, oh evening,
ye are bad teachers! Ye teach man how to cease
to be a man. Is he to give himself up to you?
Shall he become as you now are, pale, brilliant, dumb,
immense, reposing calmly upon himself?&mdash;exalted
above himself?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>424.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>For whom the Truth Exists.</hi>&mdash;Up to the
present time errors have been the power most fruitful
in consolations: we now expect the same effects
from accepted truths, and we have been waiting
rather too long for them. What if these truths could
not give us this consolation we are looking for?
Would that be an argument against them? What
have these truths in common with the sick condition
of suffering and degenerate men that they should be
useful to them? It is, of course, no proof against
the truth of a plant when it is clearly established
that it does not contribute in any way to the recovery
of sick people. Formerly, however, people
were so convinced that man was the ultimate end
of nature that they believed that knowledge could
reveal nothing that was not beneficial and useful to
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
man&mdash;nay, there could not, should not be, any other
things in existence.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps all this leads to the conclusion that truth
as an entity and a coherent whole exists only for
those natures who, like Aristotle, are at once powerful
and harmless, joyous and peaceful: just as none
but these would be in a position to seek such truths;
for the others seek remedies for themselves&mdash;however
proud they may be of their intellect and its
freedom, they do not seek truth. Hence it comes
about that these others take no real joy in science,
but reproach it for its coldness, dryness, and inhumanity.
This is the judgment of sick people
about the games of the healthy.&mdash;Even the Greek
gods were unable to administer consolation; and
when at length the entire Greek world fell ill, this
was a reason for the destruction of such gods.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>425.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>We Gods in Exile.</hi>&mdash;Owing to errors regarding
their descent, their uniqueness, their mission,
and by claims based upon these errors, men have
again and again <q>surpassed themselves</q>; but
through these same errors the world has been filled
with unspeakable suffering, mutual persecution,
suspicion, misunderstanding, and an even greater
amount of individual misery. Men have become
suffering creatures in consequence of their morals,
and the sum-total of what they have obtained by
those morals is simply the feeling that they are far
too good and great for this world, and that they are
enjoying merely a transitory existence on it. As
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
yet the <q>proud sufferer</q> is the highest type of
mankind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>426.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Colour-Blindness of Thinkers.</hi>&mdash;How
differently from us the Greeks must have
viewed nature, since, as we cannot help admitting,
they were quite colour-blind in regard to blue and
green, believing the former to be a deeper brown, and
the latter to be yellow. Thus, for instance, they
used the same word to describe the colour of dark
hair, of the corn-flower, and the southern sea; and
again they employed exactly the same expression
for the colour of the greenest herbs, the human skin,
honey, and yellow raisins: whence it follows that
their greatest painters reproduced the world they
lived in only in black, white, red, and yellow. How
different and how much nearer to mankind, therefore,
must nature have seemed to them, since in their
eyes the tints of mankind predominated also in
nature, and nature was, as it were, floating in the
coloured ether of humanity! (blue and green more
than anything else dehumanise nature). It is this
defect which developed the playful facility that characterised
the Greeks of seeing the phenomena of
nature as gods and demi-gods&mdash;that is to say, as
human forms.
</p>

<p>
Let this, however, merely serve as a simile for
another supposition. Every thinker paints his world
and the things that surround him in fewer colours
than really exist, and he is blind to individual
colours. This is something more than a mere
deficiency. Thanks to this nearer approach and
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
simplification, he imagines he sees in things those
harmonies of colours which possess a great charm,
and may greatly enrich nature. Perhaps, indeed,
it was in this way that men first learnt to take delight
in viewing existence, owing to its being first of
all presented to them in one or two shades, and consequently
harmonised. They practised these few
shades, so to speak, before they could pass on to
any more. And even now certain individuals endeavour
to get rid of a partial colour-blindness that
they may obtain a richer faculty of sight and discernment,
in the course of which they find that they
not only discover new pleasures, but are also obliged
to lose and give up some of their former ones.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>427.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Embellishment of Science.</hi>&mdash;In the
same way that the feeling that <q>nature is ugly, wild,
tedious&mdash;we must embellish it (<foreign rend='italic'>embellir la nature</foreign>)</q>&mdash;brought
about rococo horticulture, so does the
view that <q>science is ugly, difficult, dry, dreary and
weary, we must embellish it,</q> invariably gives rise
to something called philosophy. This philosophy
sets out to do what all art and poetry endeavour
to do, viz., giving amusement above all else; but it
wishes to do this, in conformity with its hereditary
pride, in a higher and more sublime fashion before
an audience of superior intellects. It is no small
ambition to create for these intellects a kind of
horticulture, the principal charm of which&mdash;like that
of the usual gardening&mdash;is to bring about an
optical illusion (by means of temples, perspective,
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
grottos, winding walks, and waterfalls, to speak in
similes), exhibiting science in a condensed form and
in all kinds of strange and unexpected illuminations,
infusing into it as much indecision, irrationality,
and dreaminess as will enable us to walk about
in it <q>as in savage nature,</q> but without trouble
and boredom.
</p>

<p>
Those who are possessed of this ambition even
dream of making religion superfluous&mdash;religion,
which among men of former times served as the highest
kind of entertainment. All this is now running
its course, and will one day attain its highest tide.
Even now hostile voices are being raised against
philosophy, exclaiming: <q>Return to science, to
nature, and the naturalness of science!</q> and thus
an age may begin which may discover the most
powerful beauty precisely in the <q>savage and ugly</q>
domains of science, just as it is only since the time
of Rousseau that we have discovered the sense for
the beauty of high mountains and deserts.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>428.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Two Kinds of Moralists.</hi>&mdash;To see a law of
nature for the first time, and to see it whole (for
example, the law of gravity or the reflection of light
and sound), and afterwards to explain such a law,
are two different things and concern different classes
of minds. In the same way, those moralists who observe
and exhibit human laws and habits&mdash;moralists
with discriminating ears, noses, and eyes&mdash;differ
entirely from those who interpret their observations.
These latter must above all be inventive, and
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
must possess an imagination untrammelled by
sagacity and knowledge.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>429.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The new Passion.</hi>&mdash;Why do we fear and dread
a possible return to barbarism? Is it because it
would make people less happy than they are now?
Certainly not! the barbarians of all ages possessed
more happiness than we do: let us not deceive ourselves
on this point!&mdash;but our impulse towards
knowledge is too widely developed to allow us to
value happiness without knowledge, or the happiness
of a strong and fixed delusion: it is painful to
us even to imagine such a state of things! Our
restless pursuit of discoveries and divinations has
become for us as attractive and indispensable as
hapless love to the lover, which on no account would
he exchange for indifference,&mdash;nay, perhaps we, too,
are hapless lovers! Knowledge within us has developed
into a passion, which does not shrink from
any sacrifice, and at bottom fears nothing but its
own extinction. We sincerely believe that all
humanity, weighed down as it is by the burden of
this passion, are bound to feel more exalted and
comforted than formerly, when they had not yet
overcome the longing for the coarser satisfaction
which accompanies barbarism.
</p>

<p>
It may be that mankind may perish eventually
from this passion for knowledge!&mdash;but even that
does not daunt us. Did Christianity ever shrink
from a similar thought? Are not love and death
brother and sister? Yes, we detest barbarism,&mdash;we
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
all prefer that humanity should perish rather
than that knowledge should enter into a stage of
retrogression. And, finally, if mankind does not
perish through some passion it will perish through
some weakness: which would we prefer? This is
the main question. Do we wish its end to be in
fire and light, or in the sands?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>430.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Likewise Heroic.</hi>&mdash;To do things of the worst
possible odour, things of which we scarcely dare
to speak, but which are nevertheless useful and
necessary, is also heroic. The Greeks were not
ashamed of numbering even the cleansing of a
stable among the great tasks of Hercules.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>431.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Opinions of Opponents.</hi>&mdash;In order to
measure the natural subtlety or weakness of even
the cleverest heads, we must consider the manner
in which they take up and reproduce the opinions
of their adversaries, for the natural measure of
any intellect is thereby revealed. The perfect sage
involuntarily idealises his opponent and frees his
inconsistencies from all defects and accidentalities:
he only takes up arms against him when he has
thus turned his opponent into a god with shining
weapons.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>432.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Investigator and Attempter.</hi>&mdash;There is no
exclusive method of knowing in science. We must
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
deal with things tentatively, treating them by turns
harshly or justly, passionately or coldly. One investigator
deals with things like a policeman, another like
a confessor, and yet a third like an inquisitive traveller.
We force something from them now by sympathy
and now by violence: the one is urged onward
and led to see clearly by the veneration which the
secrets of the things inspire in him, and the other
again by the indiscretion and malice met with in
the explanation of these secrets. We investigators,
like all conquerors, explorers, navigators, and adventurers,
are men of a daring morality, and we
must put up with our liability to be in the main
looked upon as evil.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>433.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Seeing with new Eyes.</hi>&mdash;Presuming that by
the term <q>beauty in art</q> is always implied the
imitation of something that is happy&mdash;and this I
consider to be true&mdash;according as an age or a
people or a great autocratic individuality represents
happiness: what then is disclosed by the
so-called realism of our modern artists in regard to
the happiness of our epoch? It is undoubtedly its
type of beauty which we now understand most
easily and enjoy best of any. As a consequence,
we are induced to believe that this happiness which
is now peculiar to us is based on realism, on the
sharpest possible senses, and on the true conception
of the actual&mdash;that is to say, not upon reality, but
upon what we know of reality. The results of
science have already gained so much in depth and
extent that the artists of our century have involuntarily
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
become the glorifiers of scientific <q>blessings</q>
<hi rend='italic'>per se</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>434.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Intercession.</hi>&mdash;Unpretentious regions are subjects
for great landscape painters; remarkable and
rare regions for inferior painters: for the great things
of nature and humanity must intercede in favour of
their little, mediocre, and vain admirers&mdash;whereas
the great man intercedes in favour of unassuming
things.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>435.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not to perish unnoticed.</hi>&mdash;It is not only
once but continuously that our excellence and
greatness are constantly crumbling away; the
weeds that grow among everything and cling to
everything ruin all that is great in us&mdash;the wretchedness
of our surroundings, which we always try to
overlook and which is before our eyes at every hour
of the day, the innumerable little roots of mean and
petty feelings which we allow to grow up all about
us, in our office, among our companions, or our
daily labours. If we permit these small weeds to
escape our notice we shall perish through them unnoticed!&mdash;And,
if you must perish, then do so immediately
and suddenly; for in that case you will
perhaps leave proud ruins behind you! and not, as
is now to be feared, merely molehills, covered with
grass and weeds&mdash;these petty and miserable conquerors,
as humble as ever, and too wretched even
to triumph.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<div>
<head>436.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Casuistic.</hi>&mdash;We are confronted with a very
bitter and painful dilemma, for the solution of which
not every one's bravery and character are equal:
when, as passengers on board a steamer, we discover
that the captain and the helmsman are making
dangerous mistakes, and that we are their superiors in
nautical science&mdash;and then we ask ourselves: <q>What
would happen if we organised a mutiny against
them, and made them both prisoners? Is it not
our duty to do so in view of our superiority? and
would not they in their turn be justified in putting
us in irons for encouraging disobedience?</q>
</p>

<p>
This is a simile for higher and worse situations;
and the final question to be decided is, What
guarantees our superiority and our faith in ourselves
in such a case? Success? but in order to do that
we must do the very thing in which all the danger
lies&mdash;not only dangerous for ourselves, but also for
the ship.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>437.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Privileges.</hi>&mdash;The man who really owns himself,
that is to say, he who has finally conquered himself,
regards it as his own right to punish, to
pardon, or to pity himself: he need not concede this
privilege to any one, though he may freely bestow
it upon some one else&mdash;a friend, for example&mdash;but
he knows that in doing this he is conferring a right,
and that rights can only be conferred by one who
is in full possession of power.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<div>
<head>438.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Man and Things.</hi>&mdash;Why does the man not see
the things? He himself is in the way: he conceals
the things.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>439.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Characteristics of Happiness.</hi>&mdash;There are
two things common to all sensations of happiness:
a profusion of feelings, accompanied by animal
spirits, so that, like the fishes, we feel ourselves to
be in our element and play about in it. Good
Christians will understand what Christian exuberance
means.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>440.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Never Renounce.</hi>&mdash;Renouncing the world
without knowing it, like a nun, results in a fruitless
and perhaps melancholy solitude. This has nothing
in common with the solitude of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita contemplativa</foreign>
of the thinker: when he chooses this form
of solitude he wishes to renounce nothing; but he
would on the contrary regard it as a renunciation,
a melancholy destruction of his own self, if he were
obliged to continue in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita practica</foreign>. He forgoes
this latter because he knows it, because he
knows himself. So he jumps into <emph>his</emph> water, and
thus gains <emph>his</emph> cheerfulness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>441.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Why the nearest Things become ever
more distant for Us.</hi>&mdash;The more we give up
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
our minds to all that has been and will be, the paler
will become that which actually is. When we live
with the dead and participate in their death, what are
our <q>neighbours</q> to us? We grow lonelier simply
because the entire flood of humanity is surging
round about us. The fire that burns within us, and
glows for all that is human, is continually increasing&mdash;and
hence we look upon everything that surrounds
us as if it had become more indifferent, more
shadowy,&mdash;but our cold glance is offensive.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>442.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Rule.</hi>&mdash;<q>The rule always appears to me to
be more interesting than the exception</q>&mdash;whoever
thinks thus has made considerable progress in
knowledge, and is one of the initiated.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>443.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On Education.</hi>&mdash;I have gradually come to see
daylight in regard to the most general defect in
our methods of education and training: nobody
learns, nobody teaches, nobody wishes, to endure
solitude.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>444.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Surprise at Resistance.</hi>&mdash;Because we have
reached the point of being able to see through a
thing we believe that henceforth it can offer us no
further resistance&mdash;and then we are surprised to
find that we can see through it and yet cannot penetrate
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
through it. This is the same kind of foolishness
and surprise as that of the fly on a pane of
glass.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>445.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where the Noblest are Mistaken.</hi>&mdash;We
give some one at length our dearest and most valued
possession, and then love has nothing more to give:
but the recipient of the gift will certainly not consider
it as his dearest possession, and will consequently
be wanting in that full and complete gratitude
which we expect from him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>446.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hierarchy.</hi>&mdash;First and foremost, there are the
superficial thinkers, and secondly the profound
thinkers&mdash;such as dive into the depths of a thing,&mdash;thirdly,
the thorough thinkers, who get to the bottom
of a thing&mdash;which is of much greater importance
than merely diving into its depths,&mdash;and, finally,
those who leap head foremost into the marsh:
though this must not be looked upon as indicating
either depth or thoroughness! these are the lovers
of obscurity.<note place='foot'>The play upon the words <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>gründlich</foreign> (thorough) thinkers,
and <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Untergründlichen</foreign> (lit. those underground) cannot be
rendered in English.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>447.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Master and Pupil.</hi>&mdash;By cautioning his pupils
against himself the teacher shows his humanity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<div>
<head>448.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Honouring Reality.</hi>&mdash;How can we look at
this exulting multitude without tears and acquiescence?
at one time we thought little of the object
of their exultation, and we should still think so if
we ourselves had not come through a similar experience.
And what may these experiences lead us to!
what are our opinions! In order that we may not
lose ourselves and our reason we must fly from
experiences. It was thus that Plato fled from actuality,
and wished to contemplate things only in their
pale mental concepts: he was full of sensitiveness,
and knew how easily the waves of this sensitiveness
would drown his reason.&mdash;Must the sage therefore
say, <q>I will honour reality, but I will at the same
time turn my back to it because I know and dread
it?</q> Ought he to behave as certain African tribes
do in the presence of their sovereign, whom they
approach backwards, thus showing their reverence
at the same time as their dread?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>449.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where are the poor in Spirit?</hi>&mdash;Oh, how
greatly it goes against my grain to impose my
own thoughts upon others! How I rejoice over
every mood and secret change within me as the
result of which the thoughts of others are victorious
over my own! but from time to time I enjoy an
even greater satisfaction, when I am allowed to
give away my intellectual possessions, like the
confessor sitting in his box and anxiously awaiting
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
the arrival of some distressed person who stands
in need of consolation, and will be only too glad to
relate the full misery of his thoughts so that the
listener's hand and heart will once again be filled,
and the troubled soul eased! Not only has the
confessor no desire for renown: he would fain shun
gratitude as well, for it is obtrusive, and does not
stand in awe of solitude or silence.
</p>

<p>
But to live without a name, and even to be
slightly sneered at; too obscure to arouse envy or
enmity; with a head free from fever, a handful
of knowledge, and a pocketful of experience; a
physician, as it were, of the poor in spirit, helping
this one or that one whose head is troubled with
opinions, without the latter perceiving who has
actually helped him! without any desire to appear
to be in the right in the presence of his patient, or
to carry off a victory. To speak to him in such a
way that, after a short and almost imperceptible
hint or objection, the listener may find out for himself
what is right and proudly walk away! To be
like an obscure and unknown inn which turns no one
away who is in need, but which is afterwards forgotten
and laughed at! To be without any advantages
over others&mdash;neither possessing better food
nor purer air, nor a more cheerful mind&mdash;but always
to be giving away, returning, communicating, and
becoming poorer! To know how to be humble in
order to be accessible to many people and humiliating
to none! To take a great deal of injustice
on his shoulders and creep through the cracks and
crannies of all kinds of errors, in order that we may
reach many obscure souls on their secret paths!
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
ever in possession of some kind of love, and some
kind of egoism and self-enjoyment! in possession
of power, and yet at the same time hidden and
resigned! constantly basking in the sunshine and
sweetness of grace, and yet knowing that quite near
to us stands the ladder leading to the sublime!&mdash;that
would be life! that would indeed be a reason
for a long life!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>450.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Temptations of Knowledge.</hi>&mdash;A
glance through the gate of science acts upon
passionate spirits as the charm of charms: they will
probably become dreamers, or in the most favourable
cases poets, so great is their desire for the
happiness of the man who can discern. Does it not
enter into all your senses, this note of sweet temptation
by which science has announced its joyful
message in a thousand ways, and in the thousand
and first way, the noblest of all, <q>Begone, illusion!
for then <q>Woe is me</q> also vanished, and with it woe
itself is gone</q> (Marcus Aurelius).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>451.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>For whom a Court Jester is needful.</hi>&mdash;Those
who are very beautiful, very good, and very
powerful scarcely ever learn the full and naked truth
about anything,&mdash;for in their presence we involuntarily
lie a little, because we feel their influence, and
in view of this influence convey a truth in the form
of an adaptation (by falsifying the shades and
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
degrees of facts, by omitting or adding details, and
withholding that which is insusceptible of adaptation).
If, however, in spite of all this, people of this
description insist upon hearing the truth, they must
keep a court jester&mdash;a being with the madman's
privilege of being unable to adapt himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>452.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Impatience.</hi>&mdash;There is a certain degree of impatience
in men of thought and action, which in
cases of failure at once drives them to the opposite
camp, induces them to take a great interest in it,
and to give themselves up to new undertakings&mdash;until
here again the slowness of their success drives
them away. Thus they rove about, like so many
reckless adventurers, through the practices of many
kingdoms and natures; and in the end, as the
result of their wide knowledge of men and things,
acquired by their unheard of travel and practice, and
with a certain moderation of their craving, they become
powerful practical men. Hence a defect in
character may become the school of genius.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>453.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Moral Interregnum.</hi>&mdash;Who is now in a
position to describe that which will one day supplant
moral feelings and judgments!&mdash;however certain we
may be that these are founded on error, and that
the building erected upon such foundations cannot
be repaired: their obligation must gradually diminish
from day to day, in so far as the obligation of reason
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
does not diminish! To carry out the task of re-establishing
the laws of life and action is still beyond
the power of our sciences of physiology and medicine,
society and solitude: though it is only from them
that we can borrow the foundation-stones of new
ideals (but not the ideals themselves). Thus we
live a preliminary or after existence, according to
our tastes and talents, and the best we can do in
this interregnum is to be as much as possible our
own <q><foreign rend='italic'>reges</foreign>,</q> and to establish small experimental
states. We are experiments: if we want to be
so!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>454.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Digression.</hi>&mdash;A book like this is not intended
to be read through at once, or to be read aloud.
It is intended more particularly for reference,
especially on our walks and travels: we must take
it up and put it down again after a short reading,
and, more especially, we ought not to be amongst
our usual surroundings.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>455.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Primary Nature.</hi>&mdash;As we are now
brought up, we begin by acquiring a secondary
nature, and we possess it when the world calls us
mature, of age, efficient. A few have sufficient of
the serpent about them to cast this skin some day,
when their primary nature has come to maturity
under it. But in the majority of people the germ
of it withers away.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<div>
<head>456.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Virtue in Process of Becoming.</hi>&mdash;Such
assertions and promises as those of the ancient
philosophers on the unity of virtue and felicity, or
that of Christianity, <q>Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you,</q> have never been made
with absolute sincerity, but always without a bad
conscience nevertheless. People were in the habit
of boldly laying down principles&mdash;which they
wished to be true&mdash;exactly as if they were truth
itself, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, and
in doing this they felt neither religious nor moral
compunction; for it was <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in honorem maiorem</foreign> of
virtue or of God that one had gone beyond truth,
without, however, any selfish intention!
</p>

<p>
Many good people still act up to this degree of
truthfulness: when they feel unselfish they think it
permissible to treat truth more lightly. Let it be
remembered that the word honesty is neither to be
found among the Socratic nor the Christian virtues:
it is one of our most recent virtues, not yet quite
mature, frequently misconstrued and misunderstood,
scarcely conscious of itself&mdash;something in
embryo, which we may either promote or check
according to our inclination.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>457.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Final Taciturnity.</hi>&mdash;There are some men
who fare like the digger after hidden treasures:
they quite accidentally discover the carefully-preserved
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
secrets of another's soul, and as a result
come into the possession of knowledge which it is
often a heavy burden to bear. In certain circumstances
we may know the living and the dead, and
sound their inmost thoughts to such an extent that
it becomes painful to us to speak to others about
them: at every word we utter we are afraid of being
indiscreet.&mdash;I can easily imagine a sudden silence
on the part of the wisest historian.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>458.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Great Prize.</hi>&mdash;There is a very rare thing,
but a very delightful one, viz. the man with a
nobly-formed intellect who possesses at the same
time the character and inclinations, and even
meets with the experiences, suited to such an
intellect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>459.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Magnanimity of the Thinker.</hi>&mdash;Both
Rousseau and Schopenhauer were proud enough
to inscribe upon their lives the motto, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vitam
impendere vero</foreign>. And how they both must have
suffered in their pride because they could not succeed
in <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>verum impendere vitæ!</foreign>&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>verum</foreign>, such as each
of them understood it,&mdash;when their lives ran side
by side with their knowledge like an uncouth bass
which is not in tune with the melody.
</p>

<p>
Knowledge, however, would be in a bad way if
it were measured out to every thinker only in
proportion as it can be adapted to his own person.
And thinkers would be in a bad way if their vanity
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
were so great that they could only endure such an
adaptation, for the noblest virtue of a great thinker
is his magnanimity, which urges him on in his search
for knowledge to sacrifice himself and his life unshrinkingly,
often shamefacedly, and often with
sublime scorn, and smiling.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>460.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Utilising our Hours of Danger.</hi>&mdash;Those
men and conditions whose every movement may
mean danger to our possessions, honour, and life or
death, and to those most dear to us, we shall
naturally learn to know thoroughly. Tiberius,
for instance, must have meditated much more
deeply on the character and methods of government
of the Emperor Augustus, and must have known
far more about them than even the wisest historian.
</p>

<p>
At the present day we all live, relatively speaking,
in a security which is much too great to make
us true psychologists: some survey their fellow-men
as a hobby, others out of ennui, and others again
merely from habit; but never to the extent they
would do if they were told <q>Discern or perish!</q>
As long as truths do not cut us to the quick we
assume an attitude of contempt towards them:
they still appear to us too much like the <q>winged
dreams,</q> as if we could or could not have them at
our discretion, as if we could likewise be aroused
from these truths as from a dream!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>461.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><foreign rend='italic'>Hic Rhodus, Hic Salta.</foreign></hi>&mdash;Our music, which
can and must change into everything, because
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
like the demon of the sea, it has no character of
its own: this music in former times devoted its
attention to the Christian savant, and transposed
his ideals into sounds: why cannot it likewise find
those brighter, more cheerful, and universal sounds
which correspond to the ideal thinker?&mdash;a music
which could rock itself at ease in the vast floating
vaults of the soul? So far our music has been so
great and so good; nothing seemed impossible to
its powers. May it therefore prove possible to
create these three sensations at one time: sublimity,
deep and warm light, and rapture of the greatest
possible consistency!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>462.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Slow Cures.</hi>&mdash;Chronic illnesses of the soul,
like those of the body, are very rarely due to one
gross offence against physical and mental reason,
but as a general rule they arise from innumerable
and petty negligences of a minor order.&mdash;A man,
for example, whose breathing becomes a trifle
weaker every day, and whose lungs, by inhaling
too little air, are deprived of their proper amount
of exercise, will end by being struck down by some
chronic disease of the lungs. The only remedy for
cases like these is a countless number of minor
exercises of a contrary tendency&mdash;making it a
rule, for example, to take a long and deep breath
every quarter of an hour, lying flat on the ground
if possible. For this purpose a clock which strikes
the quarters should be chosen as a lifelong companion.
</p>

<p>
All these remedies are slow and trifling; but
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
yet the man who wishes to cure his soul will
carefully consider a change, even in his least
important habits. Many a man will utter a cold
and angry word to his surroundings ten times a
day without thinking about it, and he will forget
that after a few years it will have become a regular
habit with him to put his surroundings out of
temper ten times a day. But he can also acquire
the habit of doing good to them ten times.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>463.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On the Seventh Day.</hi>&mdash;<q>You praise this
as my creation? but I have only put aside what
was a burden to me! my soul is above the vanity
of creators.&mdash;You praise this as my resignation?
but I have only stripped myself of what had become
burdensome! My soul is above the vanity of the
resigned ones!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>464.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Donor's Modesty.</hi>&mdash;There is such a
want of generosity in always posing as the donor
and benefactor, and showing one's face when doing
so! But to give and bestow, and at the same time
to conceal one's name and favour! or not to have
a name at all, like nature, in whom this fact is more
refreshing to us than anything else&mdash;here at last
we no more meet with the giver and bestower,
no more with a <q>gracious countenance.</q>&mdash;It is
true that you have now forfeited even this comfort,
for you have placed a God in this nature&mdash;and
now everything is once again fettered and oppressed!
Well? are we never to have the right of
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
remaining alone with ourselves? are we always
to be watched, guarded, surrounded by leading
strings and gifts? If there is always some one
round about us, the best part of courage and kindness
will ever remain impossible of attainment in
this world. Are we not tempted to fly to hell
before this continual obtrusiveness of heaven, this
inevitable supernatural neighbour? Never mind,
it was only a dream; let us wake up!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>465.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>At a Meeting.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> What are you looking at? you have been
standing here for a very long time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Always the new and the old over again!
the helplessness of a thing urges me on to plunge
into it so deeply that I end by penetrating to its
deepest depths, and perceive that in reality it is
not worth so very much. At the end of all
experiences of this kind we meet with a kind of
sorrow and stupor. I experience this on a small
scale several times a day.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>466.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Loss of Renown.</hi>&mdash;What an advantage it
is to be able to speak as a stranger to mankind!
When they take away our anonymity, and make
us famous, the gods deprive us of <q>half our virtue.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>467.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Doubly Patient.</hi>&mdash;<q>By doing this you will
hurt many people.</q>&mdash;I know that, and I also know
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
that I shall have to suffer for it doubly: in the
first place out of pity for their suffering, and secondly
from the revenge they will take on me. But in
spite of this I cannot help doing what I do.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>468.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Kingdom of Beauty is Greater.</hi>&mdash;We
move about in nature, cunning and cheerful, in order
that we may surprise everything in the beauty
peculiar to it; we make an effort, whether in sunshine
or under a stormy sky, to see a distant part
of the coast with its rocks, bays, and olive and
pine trees under an aspect in which it achieves its
perfection and consummation. Thus also we should
walk about among men as their discoverers and
explorers, meting out to them good and evil in
order that we may unveil the peculiar beauty which
is seen with some in the sunshine, in others under
thunder-clouds, or with others again only in twilight
and under a rainy sky.
</p>

<p>
Are we then forbidden to enjoy the evil man
like some savage landscape which possesses its own
bold and daring lines and luminous effects, while
this same man, so long as he behaves well, and in
conformity with the law, appears to us to be an
error of drawing, and a mere caricature which
offends us like a defect in nature?&mdash;Yes, this is
forbidden: for as yet we have only been permitted
to seek beauty in anything that is morally good,&mdash;and
this is sufficient to explain why we have found
so little and have been compelled to look for beauty
without either flesh or bones!&mdash;in the same way as
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
evil men are familiar with innumerable kinds of
happiness which the virtuous never dream of, we
may also find among them innumerable types of
beauty, many of them as yet undiscovered.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>469.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Inhumanity of the Sage.</hi>&mdash;The heavy
and grinding progress of the sage, who in the
words of the Buddhist song, <q>Wanders lonely like
the rhinoceros,</q> now and again stands in need of
proofs of a conciliatory and softened humanity, and
not only proofs of those accelerated steps, those
polite and sociable witticisms; not only of humour
and a certain self-mockery, but likewise of contradictions
and occasional returns to the predominating
inconsistencies. In order that he may not resemble
the heavy roller that rolls along like fate, the sage
who wishes to teach must take advantage of his
defects, and utilise them for his own adornment;
and when saying <q>despise me</q> he will implore
permission to be the advocate of a presumptuous
truth.
</p>

<p>
This sage wishes to lead you to the mountains,
and he will perhaps endanger your life: therefore
as the price of his enjoyment he willingly authorises
you to take your revenge either before or afterwards
on such a guide. Do you remember what
thoughts came into your head when he once led
you to a gloomy cavern over a slippery path? Your
distrustful heart beat rapidly, and said inwardly,
<q>This guide might surely do something better
than crawl about here! he is one of those idle
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
people who are full of curiosity&mdash;is it not doing
him too much honour to appear to attach any
value at all to him by following him?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>470.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Many at the Banquet.</hi>&mdash;How happy we are
when we are fed like the birds by the hand of
some one who throws them their crumbs without
examining them too closely, or inquiring into their
worthiness! To live like a bird which comes and
flies away, and does not carry its name on its beak!
I take great pleasure in satisfying my appetite at
the banquet of the many.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>471.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Another type of Love for one's Neighbour.</hi>&mdash;Everything
that is agitated, noisy, fitful,
and nervous forms a contrast to the great passion
which, glowing in the heart of man like a quiet and
gloomy flame, and gathering about it all that is
flaming and ardent, gives to man the appearance
of coldness and indifference, and stamps a certain
impassiveness on his features. Such men are occasionally
capable of showing their love for their
neighbour, but this love is different from that of
sociable people who are anxious to please. It is
a mild, contemplative, and calm amiability: these
people, as it were, look out of the windows of the
castle which serves them as a stronghold, and consequently
as a prison; for the outlook into the far
distance, the open air, and a different world is so
pleasant for them!
</p>

</div>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<div>
<head>472.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not Justifying Oneself.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> But why are you not willing to justify
yourself?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> I could do it in this instance, as in dozens
of others; but I despise the pleasure which lies in
justification, for all that matters little to me, and I
would rather bear a stained reputation than give
those petty folks the spiteful pleasure of saying,
<q>He takes these things very seriously.</q> This is not
true. Perhaps I ought to have more consideration
for myself, and look upon it as a duty to rectify
erroneous opinions about myself&mdash;I am too indifferent
and too indolent regarding myself, and
consequently also regarding everything that is
brought about through my agency.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>473.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Where to Build one's House.</hi>&mdash;If you feel
great and productive in solitude, society will belittle
and isolate you, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. A powerful mildness
such as that of a father:&mdash;wherever this feeling
takes possession of you, <emph>there</emph> build your house,
whether in the midst of the multitude, or on some
silent spot. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi pater sum, ibi patria.</foreign><note place='foot'>A variation of the well-known proverb, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi bene, ibi
patria</foreign>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>474.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The only Means.</hi>&mdash;<q>Dialectic is the only
means of reaching the divine essence, and penetrating
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
behind the veil of appearance.</q> This declaration
of Plato in regard to dialectic is as solemn and
passionate as that of Schopenhauer in regard to the
contrary of dialectic&mdash;and both are wrong. For
that to which they wish to point out the way to us
does not exist.&mdash;And so far have not all the great
passions of mankind been passions for something
non-existent?&mdash;and all their ceremonies&mdash;ceremonies
for something non-existent also?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>475.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Becoming Heavy.</hi>&mdash;You know him not; whatever
weights he may attach to himself he will
nevertheless be able to raise them all with him.
But you, judging from the weak flapping of your
own wings, come to the conclusion that he wishes
to remain below, merely because he does burden
himself with those weights.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>476.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>At the Harvest Thanksgiving of the
Intellect.</hi>&mdash;There is a daily increase and accumulation
of experiences, events, opinions upon
these experiences and events, and dreams upon
these opinions&mdash;a boundless and delightful display
of wealth! its aspect dazzles the eyes: I can no
longer understand how the poor in spirit can be
called blessed! Occasionally, however, I envy
them when I am tired: for the superintendence of
such vast wealth is no easy task, and its weight
frequently crushes all happiness.&mdash;Alas, if only the
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
mere sight of it were sufficient! If only we could
be misers of our knowledge!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>477.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Freed from Scepticism.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Some men emerge from a general moral
scepticism bad-tempered and feeble, corroded,
worm-eaten, and even partly consumed&mdash;but I on
the other hand, more courageous and healthier than
ever, and with my instincts conquered once more.
Where a strong wind blows, where the waves are
rolling angrily, and where more than usual danger
is to be faced, there I feel happy. I did not
become a worm, although I often had to work and
dig like a worm.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> You have just ceased to be a sceptic; for
you deny!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> And in doing so I have learnt to say yea
again.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>478.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Let us pass by.</hi>&mdash;Spare him! Leave him in
his solitude! Do you wish to crush him down
entirely? He became cracked like a glass into
which some hot liquid was poured suddenly&mdash;and
he was such a precious glass!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>479.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Love and Truthfulness.</hi>&mdash;Through our love
we have become dire offenders against truth, and
even habitual dissimulators and thieves, who give
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
out more things as true than seem to us to be
true. On this account the thinker must from time
to time drive away those whom he loves (not
necessarily those who love him), so that they may
show their sting and wickedness, and cease to
tempt him. Consequently the kindness of the
thinker will have its waning and waxing moon.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>480.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Inevitable.</hi>&mdash;No matter what your experience
may be, any one who does not feel well disposed
towards you will find in this experience some pretext
for disparaging you! You may undergo the
greatest possible revolutions of mind and knowledge,
and at length, with the melancholy smile of
the convalescent, you may be able to step out into
freedom and bright stillness, and yet some one will
say: <q>This fellow looks upon his illness as an
argument, and takes his impotence to be a proof
of the impotence of all others&mdash;he is vain enough
to fall ill that he may feel the superiority of the
sufferer.</q> And again, if somebody were to break
the chains that bound him down, and wounded
himself severely in doing so, some one else would
point at him mockingly and cry: <q>How awkward
he is! there is a man who had got accustomed to
his chains, and yet he is fool enough to burst them
asunder!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>481.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Two Germans.</hi>&mdash;If we compare Kant and
Schopenhauer with Plato, Spinoza, Pascal, Rousseau,
and Goethe, with reference to their souls
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
and not their intellects, we shall see that the two
first-named thinkers are at a disadvantage: their
thoughts do not constitute a passionate history of
their souls&mdash;we are not led to expect in them
romance, crises, catastrophies, or death struggles.
Their thinking is not at the same time the involuntary
biography of a soul, but in the case of
Kant merely of a head; and in the case of
Schopenhauer again merely the description and
reflection of a character (<q>the invariable</q>) and the
pleasure which this reflection causes, that is to say,
the pleasure of meeting with an intellect of the
first order.
</p>

<p>
Kant, when he shimmers through his thoughts,
appears to us as an honest and honourable man
in the best sense of the words, but likewise as an
insignificant one: he is wanting in breadth and
power; he had not come through many experiences,
and his method of working did not allow
him sufficient time to undergo experiences. Of
course, in speaking of experiences, I do not refer
to the ordinary external events of life, but to those
fatalities and convulsions which occur in the course
of the most solitary and quiet life which has some
leisure and glows with the passion for thinking.
Schopenhauer has at all events one advantage over
him; for he at least was distinguished by a certain
fierce ugliness of disposition, which showed itself in
hatred, desire, vanity, and suspicion: he was of a
rather more ferocious disposition, and had both
time and leisure to indulge this ferocity. But he
lacked <q>development,</q> which was also wanting in
his range of thought: he had no <q>history.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<div>
<head>482.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Seeking one's Company.</hi>&mdash;Are we then looking
for too much when we seek the company of
men who have grown mild, agreeable to the taste,
and nutritive, like chestnuts which have been put
into the fire and taken out just at the right
moment? Of men who expect little from life, and
prefer to accept this little as a present rather than
as a merit of their own, as if it were carried to them
by birds and bees? Of men who are too proud
ever to feel themselves rewarded, and too serious
in their passion for knowledge and honesty to have
time for or pleasure in fame? Such men we
should call philosophers; but they themselves will
always find some more modest designation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>483.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Satiated with Mankind.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Seek for knowledge! Yes! but always as a
man! What? must I always be a spectator of the
same comedy, and always play a part in the same
comedy, without ever being able to observe things
with other eyes than those? and yet there may be
countless types of beings whose organs are better
adapted for knowledge than ours! At the end of
all their searching for knowledge what will men
at length come to know? Their organs! which
perhaps is as much as to say: the impossibility of
knowledge! misery and disgust!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> This is a bad attack you have&mdash;reason is
attacking you! to-morrow, however, you will again
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
be in the midst of knowledge, and hence of irrationality&mdash;that
is to say, delighted about all that
is human. Let us go to the sea!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>484.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Going our own Way.</hi>&mdash;When we take the
decisive step, and make up our minds to follow
our own path, a secret is suddenly revealed to us:
it is clear that all those who had hitherto been
friendly to us and on intimate terms with us judged
themselves to be superior to us, and are offended
now. The best among them are indulgent, and
are content to wait patiently until we once more
find the <q>right path</q>&mdash;they know it, apparently.
Others make fun of us, and pretend that we have
been seized with a temporary attack of mild insanity,
or spitefully point out some seducer. The
more malicious say we are vain fools, and do their
best to blacken our motives; while the worst of all
see in us their greatest enemy, some one who is
thirsting for revenge after many years of dependence,&mdash;and
are afraid of us. What, then, are we
to do? My own opinion is that we should begin
our sovereignty by promising to all our acquaintances
in advance a whole year's amnesty for sins
of every kind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>485.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Far-off Perspectives.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> But why this solitude?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> I am not angry with anybody. But when
I am alone it seems to me that I can see my
friends in a clearer and rosier light than when I
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
am with them; and when I loved and felt music
best I lived far from it. It would seem that I
must have distant perspectives in order that I
may think well of things.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>486.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gold and Hunger.</hi>&mdash;Here and there we
meet with a man who changes into gold everything
that he touches. But some fine evil day he will
discover that he himself must starve through this
gift of his. Everything around him is brilliant,
superb, and unapproachable in its ideal beauty,
and now he eagerly longs for things which it is
impossible for him to turn into gold&mdash;and how
intense is this longing! like that of a starving man
for a meal! Query: What will he seize?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>487.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shame.</hi>&mdash;Look at that noble steed pawing the
ground, snorting, longing for a ride, and loving its
accustomed rider&mdash;but, shameful to relate, the rider
cannot mount to-day, he is tired.&mdash;Such is the
shame felt by the weary thinker in the presence
of his own philosophy!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>488.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against the Waste of Love.</hi>&mdash;Do we not
blush when we surprise ourselves in a state of
violent aversion? Well, then, we should also blush
when we find ourselves possessed of strong affections
on account of the injustice contained in them. More:
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
there are people who feel their hearts weighed down
and oppressed when some one gives them the benefit
of his love and sympathy to the extent that he
deprives others of a share. The tone of his voice
reveals to us the fact that we have been specially
selected and preferred! but, alas! I am not thankful
for being thus selected: I experience within myself
a certain feeling of resentment against him who
wishes to distinguish me in this way&mdash;he shall not
love me at the expense of others! I shall always
try to look after myself and to endure myself, and
my heart is often filled to overflowing, and with
some reason. To such a man nothing ought to be
given of which others stand so greatly in need.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>489.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Friends in Need.</hi>&mdash;We may occasionally
remark that one of our friends sympathises with
another more than with us. His delicacy is troubled
thereby, and his selfishness is not equal to the task
of breaking down his feelings of affection: in such
a case we should facilitate the separation for him,
and estrange him in some way in order to widen
the distance between us.&mdash;This is also necessary
when we fall into a habit of thinking which might
be detrimental to him: our affection for him
should induce us to ease his conscience in separating
himself from us by means of some injustice which
we voluntarily take upon ourselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>490.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Those petty Truths.</hi>&mdash;<q>You know all that,
but you have never lived through it&mdash;so I will not
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
accept your evidence. Those <q>petty truths</q>&mdash;you
deem them petty because you have not paid for
them with your blood!</q>&mdash;But are they really great,
simply because they have been bought at so high a
price? and blood is always too high a price!&mdash;<q>Do
you really think so? How stingy you are with your
blood!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>491.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Solitude, therefore!</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> So you wish to go back to your desert?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> I am not a quick thinker; I must wait for
myself a long time&mdash;it is always later and later
before the water from the fountain of my own ego
spurts forth, and I have often to go thirsty longer
than suits my patience. That is why I retire into
solitude in order that I may not have to drink from
the common cisterns. When I live in the midst
of the multitude my life is like theirs, and I do not
think like myself; but after some time it always
seems to me as if the multitude wished to banish
me from myself and to rob me of my soul. Then
I get angry with all these people, and afraid of them;
and I must have the desert to become well disposed
again.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>492.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Under the South Wind.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> I can no longer understand myself! It was
only yesterday that I felt myself so tempestuous and
ardent, and at the same time so warm and sunny
and exceptionally bright! but to-day! Now
everything is calm, wide, oppressive, and dark like
the lagoon at Venice. I wish for nothing, and
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
draw a deep breath, and yet I feel inwardly indignant
at this <q>wish for nothing</q>&mdash;so the waves
rise and fall in the ocean of my melancholy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> You describe a petty, agreeable illness. The
next wind from the north-east will blow it away.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Why so?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>493.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>On One's own Tree.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> No thinker's thoughts give me so much
pleasure as my own: this, of course, proves nothing
in favour of their value; but I should be foolish to
neglect fruits which are tasteful to me only because
they happen to grow on my own tree!&mdash;and I was
once such a fool.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Others have the contrary feeling: which likewise
proves nothing in favour of their thoughts, nor
yet is it any argument against their value.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>494.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Last Argument of the Brave Man.</hi>&mdash;There
are snakes in this little clump of trees.&mdash;Very
well, I will rush into the thicket and kill them.&mdash;But
by doing that you will run the risk of falling
a victim to them, and not they to you.&mdash;But what
do I matter?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>495.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Teachers.</hi>&mdash;During our period of youth
we select our teachers and guides from our own
times, and from those circles which we happen to
meet with: we have the thoughtless conviction that
the present age must have teachers who will suit
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
us better than any others, and that we are sure to
find them without having to look very far. Later
on we find that we have to pay a heavy penalty
for this childishness: we have to expiate our teachers
in ourselves, and then perhaps we begin to look for
the proper guides. We look for them throughout
the whole world, including even present and past
ages&mdash;but perhaps it may be too late, and at the
worst we discover that they lived when we were
young&mdash;and that at that time we lost our opportunity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>496.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Evil Principle.</hi>&mdash;Plato has marvellously
described how the philosophic thinker must necessarily
be regarded as the essence of depravity in
the midst of every existing society: for as the critic
of all its morals he is naturally the antagonist of
the moral man, and, unless he succeeds in becoming
the legislator of new morals, he lives long in the
memory of men as an instance of the <q>evil principle.</q>
From this we may judge to how great an extent
the city of Athens, although fairly liberal and fond
of innovations, abused the reputation of Plato during
his lifetime. What wonder then that he&mdash;who, as
he has himself recorded, had the <q>political instinct</q>
in his body&mdash;made three different attempts in
Sicily, where at that time a united Mediterranean
Greek State appeared to be in process of formation?
</p>

<p>
It was in this State, and with its assistance, that
Plato thought he could do for the Greeks what
Mohammed did for the Arabs several centuries later:
viz. establishing both minor and more important
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
customs, and especially regulating the daily life of
every man. His ideas were quite practicable just
as certainly as those of Mohammed were practicable;
for even much more incredible ideas, those
of Christianity, proved themselves to be practicable!
a few hazards less and a few hazards more&mdash;and
then the world would have witnessed the
Platonisation of Southern Europe; and, if we
suppose that this state of things had continued to
our own days, we should probably be worshipping
Plato now as the <q>good principle.</q> But he was unsuccessful,
and so his traditional character remains
that of a dreamer and a Utopian&mdash;stronger epithets
than these passed away with ancient Athens.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>497.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Purifying Eye.</hi>&mdash;We have the best reason
for speaking of <q>genius</q> in men&mdash;for example,
Plato, Spinoza, and Goethe&mdash;whose minds appear
to be but loosely linked to their character and
temperament, like winged beings which easily
separate themselves from them, and then rise far
above them. On the other hand, those who never
succeeded in cutting themselves loose from their
temperament, and who knew how to give to it the
most intellectual, lofty, and at times even cosmic
expression (Schopenhauer, for instance) have always
been very fond of speaking about their genius.
</p>

<p>
These geniuses could not rise above themselves,
but they believed that, fly where they would, they
would always find and recover themselves&mdash;this is
their <q>greatness,</q> and this can be greatness!&mdash;The
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
others who are entitled to this name possess the
pure and purifying eye which does not seem to have
sprung out of their temperament and character, but
separately from them, and generally in contradiction
to them, and looks out upon the world as on a
God whom it loves. But even people like these do
not come into possession of such an eye all at once:
they require practice and a preliminary school of
sight, and he who is really fortunate will at the right
moment also fall in with a teacher of pure sight.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>498.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Never Demand!</hi>&mdash;You do not know him! it
is true that he easily and readily submits both to
men and things, and that he is kind to both&mdash;his
only wish is to be left in peace&mdash;but only in so far
as men and things do not <emph>demand</emph> his submission.
Any demand makes him proud, bashful, and warlike.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>499.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Evil One.</hi>&mdash;<q>Only the solitary are evil!</q>&mdash;thus
spake Diderot, and Rousseau at once felt
deeply offended. Thus he proved that Diderot was
right. Indeed, in society, or amid social life, every
evil instinct is compelled to restrain itself, to assume
so many masks, and to press itself so often into the
Procrustean bed of virtue, that we are quite justified
in speaking of the martyrdom of the evil man. In
solitude, however, all this disappears. The evil man
is still more evil in solitude&mdash;and consequently for
him whose eye sees only a drama everywhere he is
also more beautiful.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<div>
<head>500.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against the Grain.</hi>&mdash;A thinker may for years
at a time force himself to think against the grain:
that is, not to pursue the thoughts that spring up
within him, but, instead, those which he is compelled
to follow by the exigencies of his office, an established
division of time, or any arbitrary duty which
he may find it necessary to fulfil. In the long run,
however, he will fall ill; for this apparently moral
self-command will destroy his nervous system as
thoroughly and completely as regular debauchery.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>501.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mortal Souls.</hi>&mdash;Where knowledge is concerned
perhaps the most useful conquest that has
ever been made is the abandonment of the belief in
the immortality of the soul. Humanity is henceforth
at liberty to wait: men need no longer be in
a hurry to swallow badly-tested ideas as they had to
do in former times. For in those times the salvation
of this poor <q>immortal soul</q> depended upon the
extent of the knowledge which could be acquired
in the course of a short existence: decisions had to
be reached from one day to another, and <q>knowledge</q>
was a matter of dreadful importance!
</p>

<p>
Now we have acquired good courage for errors,
experiments, and the provisional acceptance of ideas&mdash;all
this is not so very important!&mdash;and for this
very reason individuals and whole races may now
face tasks so vast in extent that in former years they
would have looked like madness, and defiance of
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
heaven and hell. Now we have the right to experiment
upon ourselves! Yes, men have the right
to do so! the greatest sacrifices have not yet been
offered up to knowledge&mdash;nay, in earlier periods it
would have been sacrilege, and a sacrifice of our
eternal salvation, even to surmise such ideas as now
precede our actions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>502.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>One Word for three different Conditions.</hi>&mdash;When
in a state of passion one man will
be forced to let loose the savage, dreadful, unbearable
animal. Another when under the influence of
passion will raise himself to a high, noble, and lofty
demeanour, in comparison with which his usual self
appears petty. A third, whose whole person is
permeated with nobility of feeling, has also the most
noble storm and stress: and in this state he represents
Nature in her state of savageness and beauty,
and stands only one degree lower than Nature in her
periods of greatness and serenity, which he usually
represents. It is while in this state of passion,
however, that men understand him better, and
venerate him more highly at these moments&mdash;for
then he is one step nearer and more akin to them.
They feel at once delighted and horrified at such a
sight and call it&mdash;divine.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>503.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Friendship.</hi>&mdash;The objection to a philosophic
life that it renders us useless to our friends would
never have arisen in a modern mind: it belongs
rather to classical antiquity. Antiquity knew the
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
stronger bonds of friendship, meditated upon it,
and almost took it to the grave with it. This is the
advantage it has over us: we, on the other hand,
can point to our idealisation of sexual love. All
the great excellencies of ancient humanity owed
their stability to the fact that man was standing
side by side with man, and that no woman was
allowed to put forward the claim of being the
nearest and highest, nay even sole object of his love,
as the feeling of passion would teach. Perhaps
our trees do not grow so high now owing to the
ivy and the vines that cling round them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>504.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reconciliation.</hi>&mdash;Should it then be the task
of philosophy to reconcile what the child has learnt
with what the man has come to recognise? Should
philosophy be the task of young men because they
stand midway between child and man and possess
intermediate necessities? It would almost appear
to be so if you consider at what ages of their life
philosophers are now in the habit of setting forth
their conceptions: at a time when it is too late
for faith and too early for knowledge.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>505.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Practical People.</hi>&mdash;We thinkers have the
right of deciding good taste in all things, and if
necessary of decreeing it. The practical people
finally receive it from us: their dependence upon
us is incredibly great, and is one of the most
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
ridiculous spectacles in the world, little though they
themselves know it and however proudly they like
to carp at us unpractical people. Nay, they would
even go so far as to belittle their practical life if
we should show a tendency to despise it&mdash;whereto
at times we might be urged on by a slightly vindictive
feeling.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>506.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Necessary Desiccation of Everything
Good.</hi>&mdash;What! must we conceive of a work
exactly in the spirit of the age that has produced
it? but we experience greater delight and surprise,
and get more information out of it when we do
not conceive it in this spirit! Have you not remarked
that every new and good work, so long
as it is exposed to the damp air of its own age is
least valuable&mdash;just because it still has about it
all the odour of the market, of opposition, of
modern ideas, and of all that is transient from
day to day? Later on, however, it dries up, its
<q>actuality</q> dies away: and then only does it
obtain its deep lustre and its perfume&mdash;and also,
if it is destined for it, the calm eye of eternity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>507.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Against the Tyranny of Truth.</hi>&mdash;Even if
we were mad enough to consider all our opinions
as truth, we should nevertheless not wish them
alone to exist. I cannot see why we should ask
for an autocracy and omnipotence of truth: it is
sufficient for me to know that it is a great power.
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
Truth, however, must meet with opposition and be
able to fight, and we must be able to rest from it
at times in falsehood&mdash;otherwise truth will grow
tiresome, powerless, and insipid, and will render us
equally so.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>508.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not to take a Thing Pathetically.</hi>&mdash;What
we do to benefit ourselves should not bring us in
any moral praise, either from others or from ourselves,
and the same remark applies to those things
which we do to please ourselves. It is looked
upon as <foreign rend='italic'>bon ton</foreign> among superior men to refrain
from taking things pathetically in such cases, and
to refrain from all pathetic feelings: the man who
has accustomed himself to this has retrieved his
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>naïveté</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>509.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Third Eye.</hi>&mdash;What! You are still in
need of the theatre! are you still so young? Be
wise, and seek tragedy and comedy where they
are better acted, and where the incidents are more
interesting, and the actors more eager. It is
indeed by no means easy to be merely a spectator
in these cases&mdash;but learn! and then, amid all difficult
or painful situations, you will have a little gate leading
to joy and refuge, even when your passions attack
you. Open your stage eye, that big third eye of
yours, which looks out into the world through the
other two.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>510.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Escaping from One's Virtues.</hi>&mdash;Of what
account is a thinker who does not know how to
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
escape from his own virtues occasionally! Surely
a thinker should be more than <q>a moral being</q>!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>511.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Temptress.</hi>&mdash;Honesty is the great temptress
of all fanatics.<note place='foot'>Hence the violence of all fanatics, who do not wish to
shout down the outer world so much as to shout down their
own inner enemy, viz. truth.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note> What seemed to tempt Luther
in the guise of the devil or a beautiful woman,
and from which he defended himself in that uncouth
way of his, was probably nothing but
honesty, and perhaps in a few rarer cases even
truth.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>512.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bold towards Things.</hi>&mdash;The man who, in
accordance with his character, is considerate and
timid towards persons, but is courageous and bold
towards things, is afraid of new and closer acquaintances,
and limits his old ones in order that he may
thus make his incognito and his inconsiderateness
coincide with truth.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>513.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Limits and Beauty.</hi>&mdash;Are you looking for
men with a fine culture? Then you will have to
be satisfied with restricted views and sights, exactly
as when you are looking for fine countries.&mdash;There
are, of course, such panoramic men: they are like
panoramic regions, instructive and marvellous: but
not beautiful.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<div>
<head>514.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To the Stronger.</hi>&mdash;Ye stronger and arrogant
intellects, we ask you for only one thing: throw no
further burdens upon our shoulders, but take some
of our burdens upon your own, since ye are stronger!
but ye delight in doing the exact contrary: for ye
wish to soar, so that we must carry your burden
in addition to our own&mdash;we must crawl!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>515.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Increase of Beauty.</hi>&mdash;Why has beauty
increased by the progress of civilisation? because
the three occasions for ugliness appear ever more
rarely among civilised men: first, the wildest outbursts
of ecstasy; secondly, extreme bodily exertion,
and, thirdly, the necessity of inducing fear by
one's very sight and presence&mdash;a matter which is
so frequent and of so great importance in the lower
and more dangerous stages of culture that it even
lays down the proper gestures and ceremonials and
makes ugliness a duty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>516.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not to Imbue our Neighbours with Our
own Demon.</hi>&mdash;Let us in our age continue to hold
the belief that benevolence and beneficence are the
characteristics of a good man; but let us not fail
to add <q>provided that in the first place he exhibits
his benevolence and beneficence towards himself.</q>
For if he acts otherwise&mdash;that is to say, if he shuns,
hates, or injures himself&mdash;he is certainly not a good
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
man. He then merely saves himself through
others: and let these others take care that they
do not come to grief through him, however well
disposed he may appear to be to them!&mdash;but to
shun and hate one's own ego, and to live in and
for others, this has up to the present, with as much
thoughtlessness as conviction, been looked upon as
<q>unselfish,</q> and consequently as <q>good.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>517.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tempting into Love.</hi>&mdash;We ought to fear a
man who hates himself; for we are liable to become
the victims of his anger and revenge. Let us
therefore try to tempt him into self-love.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>518.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Resignation.</hi>&mdash;What is resignation? It is the
most comfortable position of a patient, who, after
having suffered a long time from tormenting pains
in order to find it, at last became tired&mdash;and then
found it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>519.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Deception.</hi>&mdash;When you wish to act you must
close the door upon doubt, said a man of action.&mdash;And
are you not afraid of being deceived in doing
so? replied the man of a contemplative mind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>520.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Eternal Obsequies.</hi>&mdash;Both within and beyond
the confines of history we might imagine that we
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
were listening to a continual funeral oration: we
have buried, and are still burying, all that we have
loved best, our thoughts, and our hopes, receiving
in exchange pride, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria mundi</foreign>&mdash;that is, the pomp
of the graveside speech. It is thus that everything
is made good! Even at the present time the
funeral orator remains the greatest public benefactor.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>521.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Exceptional Vanity.</hi>&mdash;Yonder man possesses
one great quality which serves as a consolation for
him: his look passes with contempt over the
remainder of his being, and almost his entire
character is included in this. But he recovers
from himself when, as it were, he approaches his
sanctuary; already the road leading to it appears
to him to be an ascent on broad soft steps&mdash;and
yet, ye cruel ones, ye call him vain on this account!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>522.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wisdom without Ears.</hi>&mdash;To hear every day
what is said about us, or even to endeavour to
discover what people think of us, will in the end
kill even the strongest man. Our neighbours
permit us to live only that they may exercise a daily
claim upon us! They certainly would not tolerate
us if we wished to claim rights over them, and
still less if we wished to be right! In short, let
us offer up a sacrifice to the general peace, let us
not listen when they speak of us, when they praise
us, blame us, wish for us, or hope for us&mdash;nay, let
us not even think of it.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<div>
<head>523.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A Question of Penetration.</hi>&mdash;When we are
confronted with any manifestation which some one
has permitted us to see, we may ask: what is it
meant to conceal? What is it meant to draw our
attention from? What prejudices does it seek to
raise? and again, how far does the subtlety of the
dissimulation go? and in what respect is the man
mistaken?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>524.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Jealousy of the Lonely Ones.</hi>&mdash;This
is the difference between sociable and solitary
natures, provided that both possess an intellect:
the former are satisfied, or nearly satisfied, with
almost anything whatever; from the moment that
their minds have discovered a communicable and
happy version of it they will be reconciled even
with the devil himself! But the lonely souls
have their silent rapture, and their speechless
agony about a thing: they hate the ingenious
and brilliant display of their inmost problems as
much as they dislike to see the women they
love too loudly dressed&mdash;they watch her mournfully
in such a case, as if they were just beginning
to suspect that she was desirous of pleasing
others. This is the jealousy which all lonely
thinkers and passionate dreamers exhibit with regard
to the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>esprit</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>525.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Effect of Praise.</hi>&mdash;Some people become
modest when highly praised, others insolent.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<div>
<head>526.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Unwilling to be a Symbol.</hi>&mdash;I sympathise
with princes: they are not at liberty to discard
their high rank even for a short time, and thus
they come to know people only from the very
uncomfortable position of constant dissimulation&mdash;their
continual compulsion to represent something
actually ends by making solemn ciphers of them.&mdash;Such
is the fate of all those who deem it their
duty to be symbols.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>527.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Hidden Men.</hi>&mdash;Have you never come
across those people who check and restrain even
their enraptured hearts, and who would rather
become mute than lose the modesty of moderation?
and have you never met those embarrassing,
and yet so often good-natured people who do not
wish to be recognised, and who time and again
efface the tracks they have made in the sand? and
who even deceive others as well as themselves in
order to remain obscure and hidden?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>528.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Unusual Forbearance.</hi>&mdash;It is often no small
indication of kindness to be unwilling to criticise
some one, and even to refuse to think of him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>529.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How Men and Nations gain Lustre.</hi>&mdash;How
many really individual actions are left undone
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
merely because before performing them we perceive
or suspect that they will be misunderstood!&mdash;those
actions, for example, which have some intrinsic
value, both in good and evil. The more highly an
age or a nation values its individuals, therefore, and
the more right and ascendancy we accord them,
the more will actions of this kind venture to make
themselves known,&mdash;and thus in the long run a
lustre of honesty, of genuineness in good and evil,
will spread over entire ages and nations, so that
they&mdash;the Greeks, for example&mdash;like certain stars,
will continue to shed light for thousands of years
after their sinking.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>530.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Digressions of the Thinker.</hi>&mdash;The course
of thought in certain men is strict and inflexibly
bold. At times it is even cruel towards such men,
although considered individually they may be
gentle and pliable. With well-meaning hesitation
they will turn the matter ten times over in their
heads, but will at length continue their strict course.
They are like streams that wind their way past
solitary hermitages: there are places in their course
where the stream plays hide and seek with itself,
and indulges in short idylls with islets, trees,
grottos, and cascades&mdash;and then it rushes ahead
once more, passes by the rocks, and forces its way
through the hardest stones.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>531.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Different Feelings Towards Art.</hi>&mdash;From
the time when we begin to live as a hermit, consuming
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
and consumed, our only company being
deep and prolific thoughts, we expect from art
either nothing more, or else something quite
different from what we formerly expected&mdash;in a
word, we change our taste. For in former times
we wished to penetrate for a moment by means of
art into the element in which we are now living
permanently: at that time we dreamt ourselves
into the rapture of a possession which we now
actually possess. Indeed, flinging away from us
for the time being what we now have, and imagining
ourselves to be poor, or to be a child, a beggar,
or a fool, may now at times fill us with delight.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>532.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'><q>Love Equalises.</q></hi>&mdash;Love wishes to spare the
other to whom it devotes itself any feeling of
strangeness: as a consequence it is permeated with
disguise and simulation; it keeps on deceiving continuously,
and feigns an equality which in reality
does not exist. And all this is done so instinctively
that women who love deny this simulation and
constant tender trickery, and have even the
audacity to assert that love equalises (in other
words that it performs a miracle)!
</p>

<p>
This phenomenon is a simple matter if one of
the two permits himself or herself to be loved, and
does not deem it necessary to feign, but leaves
this to the other. No drama, however, could offer
a more intricate and confused instance than when
both persons are passionately in love with one
another; for in this case both are anxious to
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
surrender and to endeavour to conform to the
other, and finally they are both at a loss to know
what to imitate and what to feign. The beautiful
madness of this spectacle is too good for this world,
and too subtle for human eyes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>533.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>We Beginners.</hi>&mdash;How many things does an
actor see and divine when he watches another on
the stage! He notices at once when a muscle fails
in some gesture; he can distinguish those little
artificial tricks which are so calmly practised
separately before the mirror, and are not in conformity
with the whole; he feels when the actor is
surprised on the stage by his own invention, and
when he spoils it amid this surprise.&mdash;How differently,
again, does a painter look at some one who
happens to be moving before him! He will see
a great deal that does not actually exist in order
to complete the actual appearance of the person,
and to give it its full effect. In his mind he
attempts several different illuminations of the same
object, and divides the whole by an additional
contrast.&mdash;Oh, that we now possessed the eyes of
such an actor and such a painter for the province
of the human soul!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>534.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Small Doses.</hi>&mdash;If we wish a change to be as
deep and radical as possible, we must apply the
remedy in minute doses, but unremittingly for long
periods. What great action can be performed all
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
at once? Let us therefore be careful not to
exchange violently and precipitately the moral
conditions with which we are familiar for a new
valuation of things,&mdash;nay, we may even wish to
continue living in the old way for a long time to
come, until probably at some very remote period
we become aware of the fact that the new valuation
has made itself the predominating power
within us, and that its minute doses to which we
must henceforth become accustomed have set up
a new nature within us.&mdash;We now also begin to
understand that the last attempt at a great change
of valuations&mdash;that which concerned itself with
political affairs (the <q>great revolution</q>)&mdash;was
nothing more than a pathetic and sanguinary piece
of quackery which, by means of sudden crises, was
able to inspire a credulous Europe with the hope
of a sudden recovery, and has therefore made all
political invalids impatient and dangerous up to
this very moment.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>535.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Truth Requires Power.</hi>&mdash;Truth in itself is
no power at all, in spite of all that flattering
rationalists are in the habit of saying to the
contrary. Truth must either attract power to
its side, or else side with power, for otherwise it
will perish again and again. This has already
been sufficiently demonstrated, and more than
sufficiently!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>536.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Thumbscrew.</hi>&mdash;It is disgusting to observe
with what cruelty every one charges his two or
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
three private virtues to the account of others who
may perhaps not possess them, and whom he
torments and worries with them. Let us therefore
deal humanely with the <q>sense of honesty,</q> although
we may possess in it a thumbscrew with which we
can worry to death all these presumptuous egoists
who even yet wish to impose their own beliefs upon
the whole world&mdash;we have tried this thumbscrew
on ourselves!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>537.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mastery.</hi>&mdash;We have reached mastery when we
neither mistake nor hesitate in the achievement.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>538.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Moral Insanity of Genius.</hi>&mdash;In a
certain category of great intellects we may observe
a painful and partly horrible spectacle: in their
most productive moments their flights aloft and
into the far distance appear to be out of harmony
with their general constitution and to exceed their
power in one way or another, so that each time
there remains a deficiency, and also in the long
run a defectiveness in the entire machinery, which
latter is manifested among those highly intellectual
natures by various kinds of moral and intellectual
symptoms more regularly than by conditions of
bodily distress.
</p>

<p>
Thus those incomprehensible characteristics of
their nature&mdash;all their timidity, vanity, hatefulness,
envy, their narrow and narrowing disposition&mdash;and
that too personal and awkward element in natures
like those of Rousseau and Schopenhauer, may very
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
well be the consequences of a periodical attack of
heart disease; and this in its turn may be the
result of a nervous complaint, and this latter the
consequence of &mdash;&mdash;<note place='foot'>This omission is in the original.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
So long as genius dwells within us we are full
of audacity, yea, almost mad, and heedless of
health, life, and honour; we fly through the day
as free and swift as an eagle, and in the darkness
we feel as confident as an owl.&mdash;But let genius
once leave us and we are instantly overcome by a
feeling of the most profound despondency: we can
no longer understand ourselves; we suffer from
everything that we experience and do not experience;
we feel as if we were in the midst of
shelterless rocks with the tempest raging round us,
and we are at the same time like pitiful childish
souls, afraid of a rustle or a shadow.&mdash;Three-fourths
of all the evil committed in the world is
due to timidity; and this is above all a physiological
process.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>539.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Do you know what you Want?</hi>&mdash;Have you
never been troubled by the fear that you might
not be at all fitted for recognising what is true?
by the fear that your senses might be too dull, and
even your delicacy of sight far too blunt? If you
could only perceive, even once, to what extent your
volition dominates your sight! How, for example,
you wished yesterday to see more than some one
else, while to-day you wish to see it differently!
and how from the start you were anxious to see
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
something which would be in conformity with or
in opposition to anything that people thought they
had observed up to the present. Oh, those shameful
cravings! How often you keep your eyes open
for what is efficacious, for what is soothing, just
because you happen to be tired at the moment!
Always full of secret predeterminations of what
truth should be like, so that you&mdash;you, forsooth!&mdash;might
accept it! or do you think that to-day,
because you are as frozen and dry as a bright
winter morning, and because nothing is weighing
on your mind, you have better eyesight! Are not
ardour and enthusiasm necessary to do justice to
the creations of thought?&mdash;and this indeed is what
is called sight! as if you could treat matters of
thought any differently from the manner in which
you treat men. In all relations with thought there
is the same morality, the same honesty of purpose,
the same <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>arrière-pensée</foreign>, the same slackness, the
same faint-heartedness&mdash;your whole lovable and
hateful self! Your physical exhaustion will lend
the things pale colours whilst your feverishness will
turn them into monsters! Does not your morning
show the things in a different light from the
evening? Are you not afraid of finding in the
cave of all knowledge your own phantom, the veil
in which truth is wrapped up and hidden from
your sight? Is it not a dreadful comedy in which
you so thoughtlessly wish to take part?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>540.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Learning.</hi>&mdash;Michelangelo considered Raphael's
genius as having been acquired by study, and upon
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
his own as a natural gift: learning as opposed to
talent; though this is mere pedantry, with all due
respect to the great pedant himself. For what is
talent but a name for an older piece of learning, experience,
exercise, appropriation, and incorporation,
perhaps as far back as the times of our ancestors,
or even earlier! And again: he who learns forms
his own talents, only learning is not such an easy
matter and depends not only upon our willingness,
but also upon our being able to learn at all.
</p>

<p>
Jealousy often prevents this in an artist, or that
pride which, when it experiences any strange feeling,
at once assumes an attitude of defence instead
of an attitude of scholarly receptiveness. Raphael,
like Goethe, lacked this pride, on which account
they were great learners, and not merely the exploiters
of those quarries which had been formed
by the manifold genealogy of their forefathers.
Raphael vanishes before our eyes as a learner
in the midst of that assimilation of what his
great rival called <emph>his</emph> <q>nature</q>: this noblest of
all thieves daily carried off a portion of it; but
before he had appropriated all the genius of
Michelangelo he died&mdash;and the final series of his
works, because it is the beginning of a new plan of
study, is less perfect and good, for the simple reason
that the great student was interrupted by death in
the midst of his most difficult task, and took away
with him that justifying and final goal which he had
in view.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>541.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How we should turn to Stone.</hi>&mdash;By
slowly, very, very slowly, becoming hard like a
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
precious stone, and at last lie still, a joy to all
eternity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>542.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Philosopher and Old Age.</hi>&mdash;It is not
wise to permit evening to act as a judge of the
day; for only too often in this case weariness becomes
the judge of success and good will. We
should also take the greatest precautions in regard
to everything connected with old age and its judgment
upon life, more especially since old age, like
the evening, is fond of assuming a new and charming
morality, and knows well enough how to
humiliate the day by the glow of the evening skies,
twilight and a peaceful and wistful silence. The
reverence which we feel for an old man, especially
if he is an old thinker and sage, easily blinds us to
the deterioration of his intellect, and it is always
necessary to bring to light the hidden symptoms of
such a deterioration and lassitude, that is to say, to
uncover the physiological phenomenon which is still
concealed behind the old man's moral judgments
and prejudices, in case we should be deceived by
our veneration for him, and do something to the
disadvantage of knowledge. For it is not seldom
that the illusion of a great moral renovation and
regeneration takes possession of the old man.
Basing his views upon this, he then proceeds to
express his opinions on the work and development
of his life as if he had only then for the first time
become clearsighted&mdash;and nevertheless it is not
wisdom, but fatigue, which prompts his present state
of well-being and his positive judgments.
</p>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<p>
The most dangerous indication of this weariness
is above all the belief in genius, which as a rule only
arises in great and semi-great men of intellect at
this period of their lives: the belief in an exceptional
position, and exceptional rights. The thinker
who thus believes himself to be inspired by genius
henceforth deems it permissible for him to take
things more easily, and takes advantage of his
position as a genius to decree rather than to prove.
It is probable, however, that the need felt by the
weary intellect for alleviation is the main source of
this belief&mdash;it precedes it in time, though appearances
may indicate the contrary.
</p>

<p>
At this time too, as the result of the love which
all weary and old people feel for enjoyment, such
men as those I am speaking of wish to enjoy the
results of their thinking instead of again testing
them and scattering the seeds abroad once more.
This leads them to make their thoughts palatable
and enjoyable, and to take away their dryness,
coldness, and want of flavour; and thus it comes
about that the old thinker apparently raises himself
above his life's work, while in reality he spoils
it by infusing into it a certain amount of fantasy,
sweetness, flavour, poetic mists, and mystic lights.
This is how Plato ended, as did also that great
and honest Frenchman, Auguste Comte, who, as a
conqueror of the exact sciences, cannot be matched
either among the Germans or the Englishmen of
this century.
</p>

<p>
There is a third symptom of fatigue: that
ambition which actuated the great thinker when
he was young, and which could not then find anything
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
to satisfy it, has also grown old, and, like
one that has no more time to lose, it begins to
snatch at the coarser and more immediate means
of its gratification, means which are peculiar to
active, dominating, violent, and conquering dispositions.
From this time onwards the thinker
wishes to found institutions which shall bear his
name, instead of erecting mere brain-structures.
What are now to him the ethereal victories and
honours to be met with in the realm of proofs and
refutations, or the perpetuation of his fame in books,
or the thrill of exultation in the soul of the reader?
But the institution, on the other hand, is a temple,
as he well knows&mdash;a temple of stone, a durable
edifice, which will keep its god alive with more certainty
than the sacrifices of rare and tender souls.<note place='foot'>This, of course, refers to Richard Wagner, as does also
the following paragraph.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps, too, at this period of his life the old
thinker will for the first time meet with that love
which is fitted for a god rather than for a human
being, and his whole nature becomes softened and
sweetened in the rays of such a sun, like fruit in
autumn. Yes, he grows more divine and beautiful,
this great old man,&mdash;and nevertheless it is old age
and weariness which permit him to ripen in this
way, to grow more silent, and to repose in the
luminous adulation of a woman. Now it is all up
with his former desire&mdash;a desire which was superior
even to his own ego&mdash;for real disciples, followers
who would carry on his thought, that is, true
opponents. This desire arose from his hitherto undiminished
energy, the conscious pride he felt in
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
being able at any time to become an opponent
himself,&mdash;nay, even the deadly enemy of his own
doctrine,&mdash;but now his desire is for resolute
partisans, unwavering comrades, auxiliary forces,
heralds, a pompous train of followers. He is now
no longer able to bear that dreadful isolation in
which every intellect that advances beyond the
others is compelled to live. From this time forward
he surrounds himself with objects of veneration,
companionship, tenderness, and love; but he also
wishes to enjoy the privileges of all religious people,
and to worship what he venerates most highly
in his little community&mdash;he will even go as far as
to invent a religion for the purpose of having a
community.
</p>

<p>
Thus lives the wise old man, and in living thus
he falls almost imperceptibly into such a deplorable
proximity to priestly and poetic extravagances that
it is difficult to recollect all his wise and severe
period of youth, the former rigid morality of his
mind, and his truly virile dread of fancies and misplaced
enthusiasm. When he was formerly in the
habit of comparing himself with the older thinkers,
he did so merely that he might measure his weakness
against their strength, and that he might
become colder and more audacious towards himself;
but now he only makes this comparison to intoxicate
himself with his own delusions. Formerly he
looked forward with confidence to future thinkers,
and he even took a delight in imagining himself to
be cast into the shade by their brighter light. Now,
however, he is mortified to think that he cannot be
the last: he endeavours to discover some way of
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
imposing upon mankind, together with the inheritance
which he is leaving to them, a restriction of
sovereign thinking. He fears and reviles the pride
and the love of freedom of individual minds: after
him no one must allow his intellect to govern with
absolute unrestriction: he himself wishes to remain
for ever the bulwark on which the waves of ideas
may break&mdash;these are his secret wishes, and perhaps,
indeed, they are not always secret.
</p>

<p>
The hard fact upon which such wishes are based,
however, is that he himself has come to a halt before
his teaching, and has set up his boundary stone,
his <q>thus far and no farther.</q> In canonising himself
he has drawn up his own death warrant: from
now on his mind cannot develop further. His race
is run; the hour-hand stops. Whenever a great
thinker tries to make himself a lasting institution
for posterity, we may readily suppose that he has
passed the climax of his powers, and is very tired,
very near the setting of his sun.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>543.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>We must not make Passion an Argument
for Truth.</hi>&mdash;Oh, you kind-hearted and even
noble enthusiasts, I know you! You wish to seem
right in our eyes as well as in your own, but
especially in your own!&mdash;and an irritable and subtle
evil conscience so often spurs you on against your
very enthusiasm! How ingenious you then become
in deceiving your conscience, and lulling it to sleep!
How you hate honest, simple, and clean souls; how
you avoid their innocent glances! That better
knowledge whose representatives they are, and
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
whose voice you hear only too distinctly within
yourselves when it questions your belief,&mdash;how you
try to cast suspicion upon it as a bad habit, as a
disease of the age, as the neglect and infection of
your own intellectual health! It drives you on to
hate even criticism, science, reason! You must
falsify history to make it testify in your favour;
you must deny virtues in case they should obscure
those of your own idols and ideals.
</p>

<p>
Coloured images where arguments are needed!
Ardour and power of expression! Silver mists!
Ambrosian nights! well do you know how to enlighten
and to darken&mdash;to darken by means of
light! and indeed when your passion can no longer
be kept within bounds the moment comes when
you say to yourselves, <q>Now I have won for myself
a good conscience, now I am exalted, courageous,
self-denying, magnanimous; now I am honest!</q>
How you long for these moments when your passion
will confer upon you full and absolute rights, and
also, as it were, innocence. How happy you are
when engaged in battle and inspired with ecstasy
or courage, when you are elated beyond yourself,
when gnawing doubt has left you, and when you
can even decree: <q>Any man who is not in ecstasy
as we are cannot by any chance know what or
where truth is.</q> How you long to meet with those
who share your belief in this state&mdash;which is a
state of intellectual depravity&mdash;and to set your own
fire alight with their flames! Oh, for your martyrdom,
your victory of the sanctified lie! Must you
really inflict so much pain upon yourselves?&mdash;<emph>Must</emph>
you?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>

<div>
<head>544.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>How Philosophy is now Practised.</hi>&mdash;I can
see quite well that our philosophising youths,
women, and artists require from philosophy exactly
the opposite of what the Greeks derived from it.
What does he who does not hear the continual
exultation that resounds through every speech and
counter-argument in a Platonic dialogue, this exultation
over the new invention of rational thinking,
know about Plato or about ancient philosophy?
At that time souls were filled with enthusiasm when
they gave themselves up to the severe and sober
sport of ideas, generalisations, refutations,&mdash;that
enthusiasm which perhaps those old, great, severe,
and prudent contrapuntists in music have also
known. At that time the Greek palate still possessed
that older and formerly omnipotent taste:
and by the side of this taste their new taste appeared
to be enveloped in so much charm that the divine
art of dialectic was sung by hesitating voices as if
its followers were intoxicated with the frenzy of
love. That old form of thinking, however, was
thought within the bounds of morality, and for it
nothing existed but fixed judgments and established
facts, and it had no reasons but those of
authority. Thinking, therefore, was simply a matter
of repetition, and all the enjoyment of speech and
dialogue could only lie in their form.
</p>

<p>
Wherever the substance of a thing is looked upon
as eternal and universally approved, there is only
one great charm, the charm of variable forms, that
is, of fashion. Even in the poets ever since the
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
time of Homer, and later on in the case of the sculptors,
the Greeks did not enjoy originality, but its
contrary. It was Socrates who discovered another
charm, that of cause and effect, of reason and
sequence, and we moderns have become so used to
it, and have been brought up to the necessity of
logic that we look upon it as the normal taste, and
as such it cannot but be repugnant to ardent and
presumptuous people. Such people are pleased
by whatever stands out boldly from the normal:
their more subtle ambition leads them to believe
only too readily that they are exceptional souls,
not dialectic and rational beings, but, let us say,
<q>intuitive</q> beings gifted with an <q>inner sense,</q> or
with a certain <q>intellectual perception.</q> Above all,
however, they wish to be <q>artistic natures</q> with a
genius in their heads, and a demon in their bodies,
and consequently with special rights in this world
and in the world to come&mdash;especially the divine
privilege of being incomprehensible.
</p>

<p>
And people like these are <q>going in for</q> philosophy
nowadays! I fear they will discover one
day that they have made a mistake&mdash;what they
are looking for is religion!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>545.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>But we do not Believe you.</hi>&mdash;You would
fain pass for psychologists, but we shall not allow
it! Are we not to notice that you pretend to be
more experienced, profound, passionate, and perfect
than you actually are?&mdash;just as we notice in yonder
painter that there is a trifling presumptuousness in
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
his manner of wielding the brush, and in yonder
musician that he brings forward his theme with the
desire to make it appear superior to what it really
is. Have you experienced history within yourselves,
commotions, earthquakes, long and profound
sadness, and sudden flashes of happiness?
Have you acted foolishly with great and little fools?
Have you really undergone the delusions and woe
of the good people? and also the woe and the
peculiar happiness of the most evil? Then you
may speak to me of morality, but not otherwise!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>546.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Slave and Idealist.</hi>&mdash;The followers of Epictetus
would doubtless not be to the taste of those
who are now striving after the ideal. The constant
tension of his being, the indefatigable inward glance,
the prudent and reserved incommunicativeness of
his eye whenever it happens to gaze upon the outer
world, and above all, his silence or laconic speech:
all these are characteristics of the strictest fortitude,&mdash;and
what would our idealists, who above all else
are desirous of expansion, care for this? But in
spite of all this the Stoic is not fanatical. He
detests the display and boasting of our idealists:
his pride, however great it may be, is not eager
to disturb others. It permits of a certain gentle
approach, and has no desire to spoil anybody's good
humour&mdash;nay, it can even smile. A great deal of
ancient humanity is to be seen exemplified in this
ideal. The most excellent feature about it, however,
is that the thinker is completely free from the
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
fear of God, strictly believes in reason, and is no
preacher of penitence.
</p>

<p>
Epictetus was a slave: his ideal man is without
any particular rank, and may exist in any grade of
society, but above all he is to be sought in the
deepest and lowest social classes, as the silent and
self-sufficient man in the midst of a general state
of servitude, a man who defends himself alone
against the outer world, and is constantly living in
a state of the highest fortitude. He is distinguished
from the Christian especially, because the latter lives
in hope in the promise of <q>unspeakable glory,</q>
permits presents to be made to him, and expects
and accepts the best things from divine love and
grace, and not from himself. Epictetus, on the
other hand, neither hopes nor allows his best
treasure to be given him&mdash;he possesses it already,
holds it bravely in his hand, and defies the world
to take it away from him. Christianity was devised
for another class of ancient slaves, for those who
had a weak will and weak reason&mdash;that is to say,
for the majority of slaves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>547.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Tyrants of the Intellect.</hi>&mdash;The progress
of science is at the present time no longer
hindered by the purely accidental fact that man
attains to about seventy years, which was the case
far too long. In former times people wished to
master the entire extent of knowledge within this
period, and all the methods of knowledge were
valued according to this general desire. Minor
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
questions and individual experiments were looked
upon as unworthy of notice: people wanted to take
the shortest path under the impression that, since
everything in this world seemed to be arranged
with a view to man's needs, even the acquirement
of knowledge was regulated in view of the limits
of human life.
</p>

<p>
To solve everything at a single stroke, with one
word&mdash;this was the secret desire; and the task was
represented in the symbol of the Gordian knot or
the egg of Columbus. No one doubted that it was
possible to reach the goal of knowledge after the
manner of Alexander or Columbus, and to settle
all questions with one answer. <q>There is a mystery
to be solved,</q> seemed to be the aim of life in the
eyes of the philosopher: it was necessary in the first
place to find out what this enigma was, and to condense
the problem of the world into the simplest
enigmatical formula possible. The boundless ambition
and delight of being the <q>unraveller of the
world</q> charmed the dreams of many a thinker:
nothing seemed to him worth troubling about in
this world but the means of bringing everything to
a satisfactory conclusion. Philosophy thus became
a kind of supreme struggle for the tyrannical sway
over the intellect, and no one doubted that such a
tyrannical domination was reserved for some very
happy, subtle, ingenious, bold, and powerful person&mdash;a
single individual!&mdash;and many (the last was
Schopenhauer) fancied themselves to be this privileged
person.
</p>

<p>
From this it follows that, on the whole, science
has up to the present remained in a rather backward
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
state owing to the moral narrow-mindedness
of its disciples, and that henceforth it will have to
be pursued from a higher and more generous motive.
<q>What do I matter?</q> is written over the door of
the thinker of the future.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>548.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Victory Over Power.</hi>&mdash;If we consider all that
has been venerated up to the present as <q>superhuman
intellect</q> or <q>genius,</q> we must come to the
sad conclusion that, considered as a whole, the intellectuality
of mankind must have been extremely
low and poor: so little mind has hitherto been
necessary in order to feel at once considerably
superior to all this! Alas for the cheap glory of
<q>genius</q>! How quickly has it been raised to the
throne, and its worship grown into a custom! We
still fall on our knees before power&mdash;according to
the old custom of slaves&mdash;and nevertheless, when
the degree of venerability comes to be determined,
only the degree of reason in the power will be the
deciding factor. We must find out, indeed, to how
great an extent power has been overcome by something
higher, which it now obeys as a tool and
instrument.
</p>

<p>
As yet, however, there have been too few eyes
for such investigations: even in the majority of
cases the mere valuation of genius has almost been
looked upon as blasphemy. And thus perhaps
everything that is most beautiful still takes place in
the midst of darkness and vanishes in endless night
almost as soon as it has made its appearance,&mdash;I
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
refer to the spectacle of that power which a genius
does not lay out upon works, but upon himself as
a work, that is, his own self-control, the purifying
of his own imagination, the order and selection in
his inspirations and tasks. The great man ever
remains invisible in the greatest thing that claims
worship, like some distant star: his victory over
power remains without witnesses, and hence also
without songs and singers. The hierarchy of the
great men in all the past history of the human race
has not yet been determined.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>549.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flight from One's Self.</hi>&mdash;Those sufferers
from intellectual spasms who are impatient towards
themselves and look upon themselves with a gloomy
eye&mdash;such as Byron or Alfred de Musset&mdash;and who,
in everything that they do, resemble runaway horses,
and from their own works derive only a transient
joy and an ardent passion which almost bursts their
veins, followed by sterility and disenchantment&mdash;how
are they able to bear up! They would fain
attain to something <q>beyond themselves.</q> If we
happen to be Christians, and are seized by such a
desire as this, we strive to reach God and to become
one with Him; if we are a Shakespeare we shall
be glad to perish in images of a passionate life; if
we are like Byron we long for actions, because these
detach us from ourselves to an even greater extent
than thoughts, feelings, and works.
</p>

<p>
And should the desire for performing great deeds
really be at bottom nothing but a flight from our
own selves?&mdash;as Pascal would ask us. And indeed
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
this assertion might be proved by considering the
most noble representations of this desire for action:
in this respect let us remember, bringing the knowledge
of an alienist to our aid, that four of the
greatest men of all ages who were possessed of this
lust for action were epileptics&mdash;Alexander the
Great, Cæsar, Mohammed, and Napoleon; and
Byron likewise was subject to the same complaint.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>550.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Knowledge and Beauty.</hi>&mdash;If men, as they
are still in the habit of doing, reserve their veneration
and feelings of happiness for works of fancy
and imagination, we should not be surprised if they
feel chilled and displeased by the contrary of fancy
and imagination. The rapture which arises from
even the smallest, sure, and definite step in advance
into insight, and which our present state of science
yields to so many in such abundance&mdash;this rapture
is in the meantime not believed in by all those who
are in the habit of feeling enraptured only when
they leave reality altogether and plunge into the
depths of vague appearance&mdash;romanticism. These
people look upon reality as ugly, but they entirely
overlook the fact that the knowledge of even the
ugliest reality is beautiful, and that the man who
can discern much and often is in the end very far
from considering as ugly the main items of that
reality, the discovery of which has always inspired
him with the feeling of happiness.
</p>

<p>
Is there anything <q>beautiful in itself</q>? The
happiness of those who can recognise augments the
beauty of the world, bathing everything that exists
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
in a sunnier light: discernment not only envelops
all things in its own beauty, but in the long run
permeates the things themselves with its beauty&mdash;may
ages to come bear witness to the truth of this
statement! In the meantime let us recall an old
experience: two men so thoroughly different in
every respect as Plato and Aristotle were agreed
in regard to what constituted superior happiness&mdash;not
merely their own and that of men in general,
but happiness in itself, even the happiness of the
gods. They found this happiness to lie in knowledge,
in the activity of a well practised and inventive
understanding (not in <q>intuition</q> like the
German theologians and semi-theologians; not in
visions, like the mystics; and not in work, like the
merely practical men). Similar opinions were expressed
by Descartes and Spinoza. What great
delight must all these men have felt in knowledge!
and how great was the danger that their honesty
might give way, and that they themselves might
become panegyrists of things!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>551.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Future Virtues.</hi>&mdash;How has it come about
that, the more intelligible the world has become,
the more all kinds of ceremonies have diminished?
Was fear so frequently the fundamental basis of
that awe which overcame us at the sight of anything
hitherto unknown and mysterious, and which
taught us to fall upon our knees before the unintelligible,
and to beg for mercy? And has the
world, perhaps, through the very fact that we have
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
grown less timid, lost some of the charms it
formerly had for us? Is it not possible that our
own dignity and stateliness, our formidable character,
has decreased together with our spirit of
dread? Perhaps we value the world and ourselves
less highly since we have begun to think
more boldly about it and ourselves? Perhaps there
will come a moment in the future when this courageous
spirit of thinking will have reached such a
point that it will feel itself soaring in supreme pride,
far above men and things&mdash;when the wise man,
being also the boldest, will see himself and even
more particularly existence, the lowest of all beneath
himself?
</p>

<p>
This type of courage, which is not far removed
from excessive generosity, has been lacking in
humanity up to the present.&mdash;Oh, that our poets
might once again become what they once were:
seers, telling us something about what might
possibly happen! now that what is real and what
is past are being ever more and more taken from
them, and must continue to be taken from them&mdash;for
the time of innocent counterfeiting is at an
end! Let them try to enable us to anticipate
future virtues, or virtues that will never be found
on earth, although they may exist somewhere in
the world!&mdash;purple-glowing constellations and
whole Milky Ways of the beautiful! Where are
ye, ye astronomers of the ideal?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>552.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ideal Selfishness.</hi>&mdash;Is there a more sacred
state than that of pregnancy? To perform every
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
one of our actions in the silent conviction that in
one way or another it will be to the benefit of that
which is being generated within us&mdash;that it must
augment its mysterious value, the very thought of
which fills us with rapture? At such a time we
refrain from many things without having to force
ourselves to do so: we suppress the angry word,
we grasp the hand forgivingly; our child must be
born from all that is best and gentlest. We shun
our own harshness and brusqueness in case it should
instil a drop of unhappiness into the cup of the
beloved unknown. Everything is veiled, ominous;
we know nothing about what is going on, but
simply wait and try to be prepared. During this
time, too, we experience a pure and purifying feeling
of profound irresponsibility, similar to that felt
by a spectator before a drawn curtain; <emph>it</emph> is growing,
<emph>it</emph> is coming to light; we have nothing to do
with determining its value, or the hour of its arrival.
We are thrown back altogether upon indirect,
beneficent and defensive influences. <q>Something
greater than we are is growing here</q>&mdash;such is our
most secret hope: we prepare everything with a
view to his birth and prosperity&mdash;not merely everything
that is useful, but also the noblest gifts of our
souls.
</p>

<p>
We should, and can, live under the influence of
such a blessed inspiration! Whether what we are
looking forward to is a thought or a deed, our
relationship to every essential achievement is none
other than that of pregnancy, and all our vainglorious
boasting about <q>willing</q> and <q>creating</q>
should be cast to the winds! True and ideal
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
selfishness consists in always watching over and
restraining the soul, so that our productiveness may
come to a beautiful termination. Thus in this
indirect manner we must provide for and watch
over the good of all; and the frame of mind, the
mood in which we live, is a kind of soothing oil
which spreads far around us on the restless souls.&mdash;Still,
these pregnant ones are funny people!
let us therefore dare to be funny also, and not
reproach others if they must be the same. And
even when this phenomenon becomes dangerous
and evil we must not show less respect to that which
is generating within us or others than ordinary
worldly justice, which does not allow the judge or
the hangman to interfere with a pregnant woman.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>553.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Circuitous Routes.</hi>&mdash;Where does all this
philosophy mean to end with its circuitous routes?
Does it do more than transpose into reason, so to
speak, a continuous and strong impulse&mdash;a craving
for a mild sun, a bright and bracing atmosphere,
southern plants, sea breezes, short meals of meat,
eggs, and fruit, hot water to drink, quiet walks for
days at a time, little talking, rare and cautious
reading, living alone, pure, simple, and almost
soldier-like habits&mdash;a craving, in short, for all
things which are suited to my own personal taste?
a philosophy which is in the main the instinct for
a personal regimen&mdash;an instinct that longs for my
air, my height, my temperature, and my kind of
health, and takes the circuitous route of my head
to persuade me to it!
</p>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<p>
There are many other and certainly more lofty
philosophies, and not only such as are more gloomy
and pretentious than mine&mdash;and are they perhaps,
taking them as a whole, nothing but intellectual
circuitous routes of the same kind of personal impulses?&mdash;In
the meantime I look with a new eye
upon the mysterious and solitary flight of a butterfly
high on the rocky banks of the lake where so
many plants are growing: there it flies hither and
thither, heedless of the fact that its life will last
only one more day, and that the night will be too
cold for its winged fragility. For it, too, a philosophy
might be found, though it might not be
my own.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Sect_554'/>
<head>554.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Leading.</hi><note place='foot'>The play upon the words <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorschritt</foreign> (leading) and
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fortschritt</foreign> (progress) cannot be rendered in English.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi></note>&mdash;When we praise progress we only
praise the movement and those who do not let us
remain on the same spot, and in the circumstances
this is certainly something, especially if we live
among Egyptians. In changeable Europe, however,
where movement is <q>understood,</q> to use their
own expression, <q>as a matter of course</q>&mdash;alas, if
<emph>we</emph> only understood something about it too!&mdash;I
praise leaders and forerunners: that is to say, those
who always leave themselves behind, and do not
care in the least whether any one is following them
or not. <q>Wherever I halt I find myself alone:
why should I halt! the desert is still so wide!</q>&mdash;such
is the sentiment of the true leader.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<div>
<head>555.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Least Important Are Sufficient.</hi>&mdash;We
ought to avoid events when we know that even
the least important of them frequently enough leave
a strong impression upon us&mdash;and these we cannot
avoid.&mdash;The thinker must possess an approximate
canon of all the things he still wishes to experience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>556.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Four Virtues.</hi>&mdash;Honest towards ourselves,
and to all and everything friendly to us;
brave in the face of our enemy; generous towards
the vanquished; polite at all times: such do the
four cardinal virtues wish us to be.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>557.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Marching Against an Enemy.</hi>&mdash;How pleasant
is the sound of even bad music and bad motives
when we are setting out to march against an
enemy!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>558.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Not Concealing One's Virtues.</hi>&mdash;I love
those men who are as transparent as water, and
who, to use Pope's expression, hide not from view
the turbid bottom of their stream. Even they, however,
possess a certain vanity, though of a rare and
more sublimated kind: some of them would wish
us to see nothing but the mud, and to take no
notice of the clearness of the water which enables
us to look right to the bottom. No less a man than
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
Gautama Buddha has imagined the vanity of these
few in the formula, <q>Let your sins appear before
men, and conceal your virtues.</q> But this would
exhibit a disagreeable spectacle to the world&mdash;it
would be a sin against good taste.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>559.</head>

<p>
"<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nothing in Excess!</hi>"&mdash;How often is the
individual recommended to set up a goal which it
is beyond his power to reach, in order that he may
at least attain that which lies within the scope of
his abilities and most strenuous efforts! Is it really
so desirable, however, that he should do so? Do
not the best men who try to act according to this
doctrine, together with their best deeds, necessarily
assume a somewhat exaggerated and distorted appearance
on account of their excessive tension? and
in the future will not a grey mist of failure envelop
the world, owing to the fact that we may see everywhere
struggling athletes and tremendous gestures,
but nowhere a conqueror crowned with the laurel,
and rejoicing in his victory?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>560.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>What we are Free to do.</hi>&mdash;We can act as
the gardeners of our impulses, and&mdash;which few
people know&mdash;we may cultivate the seeds of anger,
pity, vanity, or excessive brooding, and make these
things fecund and productive, just as we can train
a beautiful plant to grow along trellis-work. We
may do this with the good or bad taste of a
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
gardener, and as it were, in the French, English,
Dutch, or Chinese style. We may let nature take
its own course, only trimming and embellishing a
little here and there; and finally, without any
knowledge or consideration, we may even allow the
plants to spring up in accordance with their own
natural growth and limitations, and fight out their
battle among themselves,&mdash;nay, we can even take
delight in such chaos, though we may possibly
have a hard time with it! All this is at our option:
but how many know that it is? Do not the majority
of people believe in themselves as complete and
perfect facts? and have not the great philosophers
set their seal on this prejudice through their doctrine
of the unchangeability of character?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>561.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Letting our Happiness also Shine.</hi>&mdash;In the
same way as painters are unable to reproduce the
deep brilliant hue of the natural sky, and are compelled
to use all the colours they require for their
landscapes a few shades deeper than nature has
made them&mdash;just as they, by means of this trick, succeed
in approaching the brilliancy and harmony of
nature's own hues, so also must poets and philosophers,
for whom the luminous rays of happiness
are inaccessible, endeavour to find an expedient.
By picturing all things a shade or two darker than
they really are, their light, in which they excel, will
produce almost exactly the same effect as the
sunlight, and will resemble the light of true happiness.&mdash;The
pessimist, on the other hand, who paints
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
all things in the blackest and most sombre hues,
only makes use of bright flames, lightning, celestial
glories, and everything that possesses a glaring,
dazzling power, and bewilders our eyes: to him
light only serves the purpose of increasing the
horror, and of making us look upon things as being
more dreadful than they really are.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>562.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Settled and the Free.</hi>&mdash;It is only in
the Underworld that we catch a glimpse of that
gloomy background of all that bliss of adventure
which forms an everlasting halo around Ulysses
and his like, rivalling the eternal phosphorescence
of the sea,&mdash;that background which we can never
forget: the mother of Ulysses died of grief and
yearning for her child. The one is driven on from
place to place, and the heart of the other, the tender
stay-at-home friend, breaks through it&mdash;so it always
is. Affliction breaks the hearts of those who live
to see that those whom they love best are deserting
their former views and faith,&mdash;it is a tragedy
brought about by the free spirits,&mdash;a tragedy which,
indeed, occasionally comes to their own knowledge.
Then, perhaps, they too, like Ulysses, will be forced
to descend among the dead to get rid of their
sorrow and to relieve their affliction.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>563.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Illusion of the Moral Order of the
Universe.</hi>&mdash;There is no <q>eternal justice</q> which
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
requires that every fault shall be atoned and paid
for,&mdash;the belief that such a justice existed was a
terrible delusion, and useful only to a limited extent;
just as it is also a delusion that everything is guilt
which is felt as such. It is not the things themselves,
but the opinions about things that do not exist, which
have been such a source of trouble to mankind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>564.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>By the Side of Experience.</hi>&mdash;Even great intellects
have only a hand-breadth experience&mdash;in
the immediate proximity of this experience their
reflection ceases, and its place is taken by unlimited
vacuity and stupidity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>565.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dignity and Ignorance.</hi>&mdash;Wherever we
understand we become amiable, happy, and ingenious;
and when we have learnt enough, and
have trained our eyes and ears, our souls show
greater plasticity and charm. We understand so
little, however, and are so insufficiently informed,
that it rarely happens that we seize upon a thing
and make ourselves lovable at the same time,&mdash;on
the contrary we pass through cities, nature, and
history with stiffness and indifference, at the same
time taking a pride in our stiff and indifferent
attitude, as if it were simply due to superiority.
Thus our ignorance and our mediocre desire for
knowledge understand quite well how to assume a
mask of dignity and character.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<div>
<head>566.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Living Cheaply.</hi>&mdash;The cheapest and most innocent
mode of life is that of the thinker; for, to
mention at once its most important feature, he has
the greatest need of those very things which others
neglect and look upon with contempt. In the
second place he is easily pleased and has no desire
for any expensive pleasures. His task is not difficult,
but, so to speak, southern; his days and nights
are not wasted by remorse; he moves, eats, drinks,
and sleeps in a manner suited to his intellect, in
order that it may grow calmer, stronger, and
clearer. Again, he takes pleasure in his body and
has no reason to fear it; he does not require
society, except from time to time in order that he
may afterwards go back to his solitude with even
greater delight. He seeks and finds in the dead
compensation for the living, and can even replace
his friends in this way&mdash;viz., by seeking out among
the dead the best who have ever lived.&mdash;Let us
consider whether it is not the contrary desires and
habits which have made the life of man expensive,
and as a consequence difficult and often unbearable.
In another sense, however, the thinker's life is
certainly the most expensive, for nothing is too
good for him; and it would be an intolerable
privation for him to be deprived of the best.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>567.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>In the Field.</hi>&mdash;<q>We should take things more
cheerfully than they deserve; especially because for
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
a very long time we have taken them more seriously
than they deserved.</q> So speak the brave soldiers
of knowledge.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>568.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poet and Bird.</hi>&mdash;The bird Phœnix showed the
poet a glowing scroll which was being gradually
consumed in the flames. <q>Be not alarmed,</q> said
the bird, <q>it is your work! It does not contain
the spirit of the age, and to a still less extent the
spirit of those who are against the age: so it must
be burnt. But that is a good sign. There is many
a dawn of day.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>569.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To the Lonely Ones.</hi>&mdash;If we do not respect
the honour of others in our soliloquies as well as
in what we say publicly, we are not gentlemen.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>570.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Losses.</hi>&mdash;There are some losses which communicate
to the soul a sublimity in which it ceases
from wailing, and wanders about silently, as if in the
shade of some high and dark cypresses.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>571.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Battle-Field Dispensary of the Soul.</hi>&mdash;What
is the most efficacious remedy?&mdash;Victory.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>572.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Life shall Comfort Us.</hi>&mdash;If, like the thinker,
we live habitually amid the great current of ideas
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
and feelings, and even our dreams follow this current,
we expect comfort and peacefulness from life,
while others wish to rest from life when they give
themselves up to meditation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>573.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Casting One's Skin.</hi>&mdash;The snake that cannot
cast its skin perishes. So too with those minds
which are prevented from changing their views:
they cease to be minds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>574.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Never Forget!</hi>&mdash;The higher we soar the
smaller we appear to those who cannot fly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>575.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>We Aeronauts of the Intellect.</hi>&mdash;All
those daring birds that soar far and ever farther
into space, will somewhere or other be certain to
find themselves unable to continue their flight, and
they will perch on a mast or some narrow ledge&mdash;and
will be grateful even for this miserable accommodation!
But who could conclude from this
that there was not an endless free space stretching
far in front of them, and that they had flown as
far as they possibly could? In the end, however,
all our great teachers and predecessors have come
to a standstill, and it is by no means in the noblest
or most graceful attitude that their weariness has
brought them to a pause: the same thing will
happen to you and me! but what does this matter
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
to either of us? <emph>Other birds will fly farther!</emph> Our
minds and hopes vie with them far out and on high;
they rise far above our heads and our failures, and
from this height they look far into the distant
horizon and see hundreds of birds much more
powerful than we are, striving whither we ourselves
have also striven, and where all is sea, sea, and
nothing but sea!
</p>

<p>
And where, then, are we aiming at? Do we
wish to cross the sea? whither does this over-powering
passion urge us, this passion which we
value more highly than any other delight? Why
do we fly precisely in this direction, where all the
suns of humanity have hitherto set? Is it possible
that people may one day say of us that we also
steered westward, hoping to reach India&mdash;but that
it was our fate to be wrecked on the infinite? Or,
my brethren? or&mdash;?
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
